



  

 
 




   
     
   
   
   
   
   
   

  


                    

   

     
     
     
     
   
 

  

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
 
 
 


   OA-and-Interviews/Application experiences/2021-22/SIG/Quantitative Trader - 2022 Programme.md at main · Leader-board/OA-and-Interviews · GitHub 



   
   
   
   

    
   


      


     


   
  

   
   

     

 





   

  




     

  

     

    

       

       

     
     
     

           
           
  




       



         


   
   
   
   

   

       

     

   

          
  



    

     
   


   


   

     
   

   
   
   

 
 


   

   

   
     
       

      

     
       Skip to content 

       
      
       
       
 
 
 

 
  
   
   

 





      

          

              
 
 

 

 
   Navigation Menu 

   
     Toggle navigation 
   

   
     
       
            
      

             

             
 
   
 
      


       
         
       

       
           
            Sign in
           
               
                 
  Appearance settings 

  
 

 
  
   
   

 

    


      

    



     
       
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
   
        Platform       AI CODE CREATION       GitHub Copilot  Write better code with AI 
 
     GitHub Copilot app  Direct agents from issue to merge 
 
     MCP Registry  Integrate external tools 
 
 

   DEVELOPER WORKFLOWS       Actions  Automate any workflow 
 
     Codespaces  Instant dev environments 
 
     Issues  Plan and track work 
 
     Code Review  Manage code changes 
 
     Code Quality  Enforce quality at merge 
 
 

   APPLICATION SECURITY       GitHub Advanced Security  Find and fix vulnerabilities 
 
     Code security  Secure your code as you build 
 
     Secret protection  Stop leaks before they start 
 
 

   EXPLORE     Why GitHub  
   Documentation   
   Blog   
   Changelog   
   Marketplace  
 

    View all features   



   Solutions       BY COMPANY SIZE     Enterprises  
   Small and medium teams  
   Startups  
   Nonprofits  
 

   BY USE CASE     App Modernization  
   DevSecOps  
   DevOps  
   CI/CD  
   View all use cases   
 

   BY INDUSTRY     Healthcare  
   Financial services  
   Manufacturing  
   Government  
   View all industries   
 

    View all solutions   



   Resources       EXPLORE BY TOPIC     AI  
   Software Development  
   DevOps  
   Security  
   View all topics   
 

   EXPLORE BY TYPE     Customer stories  
   Events & webinars  
   Ebooks & reports  
   Business insights  
   GitHub Skills   
 

   SUPPORT & SERVICES     Documentation   
   Customer support   
   Community forum  
   Trust center  
   Partners  
 

    View all resources   



   Open Source       COMMUNITY       GitHub Sponsors  Fund open source developers 
 
 

   PROGRAMS     Security Lab   
   Maintainer Community   
   Accelerator  
   GitHub Stars   
   Archive Program   
 

   REPOSITORIES     Topics  
   Trending  
   Collections  
 

 


   Enterprise       ENTERPRISE SOLUTIONS       Enterprise platform  AI-powered developer platform 
 
 

   AVAILABLE ADD-ONS       GitHub Advanced Security  Enterprise-grade security features 
 
     Copilot for Business  Enterprise-grade AI features 
 
     Premium Support  Enterprise-grade 24/7 support 
 
 

 


   Pricing  
  

 



         
                


 
   
       
         
           
        

         Search or jump to... 
           
             
          

       

     

    
 
   
       Search code, repositories, users, issues, pull requests... 
     
      
                    
              -->   
   
     
       
        Search
       
       
           
             
           
         
           

           
             

             
          

        

           
             Clear 
                
 

           
      

       
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

         
                          

        

       
         
           
         
          

    

     

  
           
             Search syntax tips              

          

        




    

 

  

   

   
    
 
   
     
   
     
       
        Provide feedback
       
        
    

     
         
    

  

  


       
                     -->    
           We read every piece of feedback, and take your input very seriously.

            
           
           Include my email address so I can be contacted 
 

       
                      Cancel
 
               Submit feedback
 


  

     
    
 
   
     
   
     
       
        Saved searches
       
         Use saved searches to filter your results more quickly 
    

     
         
    

  

  


       
                  


         
            -->    
           


           

           
             Name 
             
               
               
             
          


           
             Query 
             
          


           
            To see all available qualifiers, see our  documentation .
          

         


         
           

        




       
                      Cancel
 
               Create saved search
 


  
     
  

 


             
               
                Sign in
               
            


               
                Sign up
               

                 
                 
  Appearance settings 

  
 

 
  
   
   

 

    


           Resetting focus 
        

      

    

  

 

       
  
         
         You signed in with another tab or window.  Reload  to refresh your session. 
         You signed out in another tab or window.  Reload  to refresh your session. 
         You switched accounts on another tab or window.  Reload  to refresh your session. 

        
  Dismiss alert 


  


    


   









     




   
    
 
   
     
       
     
     
      
       {{ message }}


    

  



   




    






   
         
     
      
      








  

   

       

         
            
   
       
    
     
       
        Leader-board
      
     / 
     
       OA-and-Interviews 
     

       Public 
  



        


         
             
    
      

   
                  Notifications
      You must be signed in to change notification settings 

  


   
                Fork
     183 
 
  


   
         
               
          Star
            2.5k 
 

  


 

        

      


         




           

   
       
   
    
               
         Code 
            


    
 

       
   
    
               
         Issues 
           0 


    
 

       
   
    
               
         Pull requests 
           0 


    
 

       
   
    
               
         Discussions 
            


    
 

       
   
    
               
         Actions 
            


    
 

       
   
    
               
         Security and quality 
           0 


    
 

       
   
    
               
         Insights 
            


    
 

 
            
   
        
  Additional navigation options 


 
   
    
                  
   
     
         
    
    
     
         
           
         
      
         
          Code
       
 
  


         
    
    
     
         
           
         
      
         
          Issues
       
 
  


         
    
    
     
         
           
         
      
         
          Pull requests
       
 
  


         
    
    
     
         
           
         
      
         
          Discussions
       
 
  


         
    
    
     
         
           
         
      
         
          Actions
       
 
  


         
    
    
     
         
           
         
      
         
          Security and quality
       
 
  


         
    
    
     
         
           
         
      
         
          Insights
       
 
  


     

 




      

    
 

 

  

  



 
     
    



    
      
    








 
  
   
           
     

   



     
 
  



                   Files       Expand file tree  
 
          main 

       

    Breadcrumbs    OA-and-Interviews 
  /  Application experiences 
  /  2021-22 
  /  SIG 
    /  Quantitative Trader - 2022 Programme.md 
    Copy path 


             
 

   Blame    
    More file actions 


      Blame    
    More file actions 






   

  
   Latest commit   
  
  History        History     
         History 




       165 lines (95 loc) · 9.57 KB 



                main 

       

    Breadcrumbs    OA-and-Interviews 
  /  Application experiences 
  /  2021-22 
  /  SIG 
    /  Quantitative Trader - 2022 Programme.md 
    Copy path 


      Top   


  File metadata and controls       Preview
  
    Code
  
    Blame
  
  
    165 lines (95 loc) · 9.57 KB 



  
  
     Raw   
     Copy raw file 
     Download raw file 


    Outline      Edit and raw actions 



 

      Quantitative Trader - 2022 Programme    

  Parameters    

 
 Role: Quantitative Trader - 2022 Programme

 Location: Dublin, Ireland

 Applied: September 13, 2021

 Notification of failure: September 29, 2021

 
  Mathematical entrance exam    

 This does not appear to be automatic, though I'm not sure on whether everyone gets it.

 The exam contains 14 questions of a mainly probability nature (with a focus on expectations) and a couple of brain-teasers. While the questions are not particularly hard themselves, there's only 20 minutes in total, so one is likely to be pressured for time. Example questions would be finding the expectation of a particular infinite stream or finding whether a particular bet is good (which would involve comparing the expected value with the value of the bet). The questions were a mix of MCQ and fill in the blanks (usually an integer).

  Round 1 interview    

 This was with a recruiter from HR. Notice that while they are from HR, they usually have significantly better mathematical understanding that average (in fact, their application for a recruiter wants potential candidates to have done coursework in mathematics).

 The interview was a split between stock (non-technical) and probability-based questions. I was served five probability questions (again focusing on expectations, through there was one on Bayes' theorem). While I did get them all, I had to request hints for a couple. Preparing from quant guides such as Heard on the Street or similar should help. To give more details on the questions themselves (helpful when reading in conjunction with the interview feedback - see the GDPR section):

 
 The matching heads problem was given a set of three tosses with a certain probability and given a bet (say getting 3 pounds if two heads and a tail or 0 otherwise) and you pay some money to take the bet, whether this is a good bet or not. The solution would involve drawing up a table of probabilities for that scenario and computing expectations.

 The "painting" question was given a scenario with a particular chance of the painting being real and that being fake, what is the expected value of the painting (again taking expectations); there was a harder variant which I didn't do as well (and hence got a 3)

 I can't recall the box game as well (the question was to find the expected number of boxes to open if I'm right; can't recall the scenario)

 The last question ("3 biased coins") was a standard Bayes' problem; was something like given a fair coin, a coin with only heads and coin with only tails (or something like that with different probabilities), if you pick a random coin and it's head, what is the probability it was from coin 2?

 
 The non-technical portion was generally standard with some tricky questions. While the classic ones (why SIG, why quant) were asked, tricky ones included:

 
 how I did "so well" in my undergraduate - while I had a first, it was a very low first and that isn't a case of "done so well" given that getting a first isn't impressive  at all .

 what my research supervisor would tell about me

 
  Notification of failure    

 Was by email. A request to feedback did not elicit a response (this was despite them explicitly telling at my Round 1 interview that I'm free to ask for feedback). When I asked them later about this at my university's career fair, I was told that my interviewer was on leave then and would come later. I didn't ask again after that.

  Getting the interview performance using GDPR    

  Written on April 8 2022 

 I was not convinced that contacting them again (and possibly being ghosted again) was a good idea, so decided to take the GDPR route instead to see what I could get. So I made a standard GDPR request:

 
 Hello,

 I would like access to all of the recruitment data you have (specifically the ones used to make a decision on my application) with me with respect to the Quantitative Trader - 2022 Programme role. This includes the scores I got on the mathematical entrance exam I had to do as the first stage, and any feedback for the interview I subsequently did for this role.

 This is a formal GDPR request to access this data.

 Regards, 

Leader Board

 
 I got this from someone who works at SIG's legal team 6 days later:

 
 Dear Mr. Board

 I just wanted to let you know that we are in receipt of your request and are working on it. We will respond within the required timeframe.

 Yours sincerely,

 [human name] 

SIG 

International Centre 

IFSC 

Dublin, D01 T6T0

 
 A week from that, I got this, with two attachments which will be described below:

 
 Dear Mr. Board,

 Please find attached the recruitment data requested. I have redacted the name of the interviewer as it is not your personal data.

 Yours sincerely,

 [human name] 

SIG 

International Centre 

IFSC 

Dublin, D01 T6T0

 Tel: [a phone number] 

Direct:[a phone number]

 
 I found the mention of them redacting the interviewer's name funny; after all, I already know their name!

 Now, for the attachments.

    

 The first attachment was my entrance test  in full  (notice that I only requested the scores I got on the test, but they provided the questions as well).

 
 Repository policies preclude sharing the questions themselves - they are most likely recycled after all.

 
 Even better, there's useful statistical data on my overall performance!

    

 ... and is useful data for those trying to figure out how well they need to do. And yes, I really did do that poorly.

 Now for the second one:

    

 
 I have had to redact some of the sections. The portion on soft skills cannot be shared publicly because it contains more personal data than I'm willing to share here, unfortunately.

 
 They said that these were notes - and they are. For instance, the answer to the job search stage (and more) was paraphrased by the recruiter!

 And it gets better. Here's the section on my interview performance:

    

    

 That's some seriously good interview data - giving a very good insight into what I messed up on and the few bits I did well.

 And here's my overall performance:

    

 This alone was enough to convince me that it was my poor mathematical skills that caused me to fail, given that I did better in the soft skill section (which is very rare to see given that I normally fail in those parts an interview). Kind of bittersweet I'd say - bitter in that it was a technical failure (which is disappointing to see given that I try not to get them) - but sweet in that I got a lot of good insight on  why  I failed. The one problem is that they did not explicitly mention that - notice that all they said in the "do you recommend" part was a "No".

 But that isn't all. Here are the "recruiter comments":

    

 
  RECRUITER COMMENTS :

 Nice guy and was rooting for him.

 He had seen something very similar to Matching Heads, so dont feel like that counts for much. Of the
other 3 questions, he was on the wrong path with 2 of them, and needed hints.

 Softs seemed fine without probing him too hard.
Workload during his exchange year sounded heavy.

 Probably wouldn't have been available for June due to Masters.

 The goal of the interview is to gain relevant information and insight into the candidate's character,
skills, and experience. Do not ask questions pertaining to a candidate’s sex, age, race, color, religion,
creed, marital status, national origin, ancestry, citizenship, military status, veteran status, handicap,
mental disability, physical disability, medical condition, gender, sexual preference or orientation,
gender identity, gender expression, genetic information or political affiliation.

 
 When I first opened this PDF, I actually went right to the end of the document, trying to think of what bad things they had to say about me. So seeing this instead was a shock, and I still cannot figure out if the recruiter's first sentence was meant to be sarcasm or not. Again, the one issue I have with this PDF in general is an  explicit  confirmation that "this" (like my poor mathematical skills) caused my failure, and adding comments about my masters program confused me since I could not tell if  those  played a factor in my failure (if I had a 4/5 in the mathematics section, I would have looked at that more closely in my writeup).

 Still, this is the  best  failure data I've ever gotten as of writing in my four years of applying, and I think that means something (well done SIG for providing this, but also shame on them for making me have to take the GDPR route, as I certainly wouldn't be able to get this if I applied for a US role). Is it really hard to give this data to every candidate? In my opinion, no. I mean, in a way I've gotten more respect for SIG because I implicitly know why I failed (and how well I did), instead of having to make guesses (which as it turns out wasn't true).

  Takeaway    

 This one stung. It is hard for me to find a role that I am really interested in, and I thought I did OK in the interview. I think my mathematical skills are still not at the level of what they should be (which is likely) or that I somehow messed up in the non-technical portion (also possible). Hard to be certain without feedback. Long way to go it seems.

  Update : sadly it turned out to be a weakness in my mathematical skills; yes, long way to go indeed. And GDPR is kind of a gem - it can amaze me at times as to how much (useful and insightful) data companies will release with it.

 
 
 


 
   





 
 
 

     

 




  


 

     
  


  


           
   Footer 

  


   
     
       
         
 
       
        © 2026 GitHub, Inc.
       
    


     
       Footer navigation 

       


           
             Terms 
          


           
             Privacy 
          


           
             Security 
          


           
             Status 
          


           
             Community 
          


           
             Docs 
          


           
             Contact 
          


           
   
     
       Manage cookies
     
   



 
   
     
      Do not share my personal information
     
   



       
     
  

 



      




   
     
     
       
     
    You can’t perform that action at this time.
  


     
   
      
     
       
         
       
       

     
   
 

     
   
  




     
   
     
       
       
     
  

 
 
   
     
       
       
     
  

 




    

     

     

   
 

