1. Sleep. 2018 May 1;41(5). doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsy025.

Sleep deprivation and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease.

Olsson M(1)(2)(3)(4), Ärlig J(1)(2)(3), Hedner J(3)(4), Blennow K(1)(2), 
Zetterberg H(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Internal medicine, Center for Sleep and Vigilance Disorders, 
University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Sleep Laboratory, Pulmonary Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen 
Square, London, UK.
(6)UK Dementia Research Institute, London, UK.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To investigate the cumulative effect of five consecutive 
nights of partial sleep deprivation (PSD) on a panel of cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) biomarkers in healthy adults.
METHODS: A randomized, cross-over study conducted at the University of 
Gothenburg. The participants (N = 13) were healthy adults (20-40 years of age) 
with a normal sleeping pattern. The participants underwent a baseline sleep 
period consisting of five nights with 8 hr spent in bed. A subsequent period 
with PSD consisted of five nights of maximum 4 hr of sleep per night. Four 
participants were also subjected to a prolonged period of PSD consisting of 
eight nights with 4 hr of sleep per night. Sleep was monitored by means of 
observation, actigraphy, and continuous polysomnographic recordings. CSF samples 
were collected by routine lumbar puncture after each period. CSF biomarkers 
included the 38, 40, and 42 amino acid-long Aβ isoforms, total-τ, phospho-τ, 
orexin, monoamine metabolites (3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol, homovanillinic 
acid, and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid), neuron-derived biomarkers (neurofilament 
light, neuron-specific enolase, and fatty acid-binding protein), and astro- and 
microglia-derived biomarkers (glial fibrillary acidic protein, S-100B, and 
YKL-40).
RESULTS: PSD was associated with a 27 per cent increase in CSF orexin 
concentrations (p = 0.001). No PSD-related changes in CSF biomarkers for amyloid 
build-up in the brain, Alzheimer's disease (AD)-type neurodegeneration, or 
astroglial activation were observed. PSD led to a shortening of time spent in 
all sleep stages except slow-wave sleep (SWS).
CONCLUSION: Five to eight consecutive nights of PSD, with preserved SWS, 
increased CSF orexin but had no effect on CSF biomarkers for amyloid deposition, 
neuronal injury, and astroglial activation.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/zsy025
PMID: 29425372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]