1. Wellcome Open Res. 2025 Nov 17;10:91. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.23541.2. 
eCollection 2025.

Midlife short sleep with and without obesity, and the risk of future dementia: a 
prospective cohort study.

Park HK(1)(2), Frank P(3), Ren L(1)(4), Livingston G(1)(5), Kivimaki M(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, 6th floor, Wing B, 
Maple House, W1T 7NF, UK.
(2)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Centre, Sungkyunkwan University, 
Seoul, 06531, South Korea.
(3)Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, University College London, London, 
England, WC1E 7HB, UK.
(4)China center for health development studies, Peking University School of 
Public Health, Beijing, 100083, China.
(5)Camden and Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London, England, UK.
(6)Department of Public Health Clinicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
00014, Finland.

Short sleep duraiton is a putative risk for dementia, whereas midlife obesity is 
an well-known risk factor. Midlife short sleep and obesity share some biological 
changes such as inflammations or metabolic changes, but their combined impact is 
not yet fully understood. Our aim is to investigate the associations of short 
leep obesity with cognitive decline and dementia risk, and to investigate 
whether these associations are mediated by blood markers. This is an analysis of 
prospective cohort study of adults who were free of dementia, had data on sleep 
duration and BMI at baseline in 1997-1999, and were tracked for dementia 
diagnoses until 2023 via linkage to electronic health records. Participants will 
be divided into four groups: (1) the reference group (2) short sleep (2) short 
sleep (≤6 hours) and non-obese weight; (3) normal sleep and obesity (≥30kg/m 2); 
(4) short sleep and obesity, the main exposure group. Baseline blood-based 
biomarkers include chitinase-3-like protein (YKL-40), triggering receptor 
expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2), neurofilament-light chain (NfL), and 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), interleukin (IL)-1(, IL-6, C-reactive 
protein (CRP), transforming growth factor (TGF)-(3, adiponectin, insulin, 
ghrelin, and leptin. Cognitive status, measured using tests of executive 
function, memory, phonemic fluency and semantic fluency, was repeatedly 
assessed. We will use linear mixed-effects models and Cox proportional hazard 
models to examine the associations of short sleep and obesity with change in 
cognitive functioning and risk of dementia, respectively. To examine whether 
blood-based biomarkers partially mediate these associations, formal mediation 
analyses will be performed, estimating the proportion of excess dementia risk 
mediated by the biomarkers individually and in combination. The results of this 
study may provide an additional insight whether co-occurring short sleep and 
obesity is a risk factor for dementia and the biological changes associated with 
these factors..

Plain Language Summary: It has been known for some time that a considerable 
proportion of dementia can theoretically be prevented through controlling of 
modifiable risk factors, particularly in midlife. There are many postulated risk 
factors, including short sleep duration and obesity. We will investigate whether 
short sleep combined with obesity is associated with an increased risk of 
cognitive impairment in terms of memory, reasoning and fluency, and clinical 
dementia. If so, we will test what biomarker changes in the body may contribute 
this as it is unknown. We will use information from an observational cohort 
study of British civil servants, the Whitehall II study, with a nearly 30 years 
of follow-up. We will then look at whether inflammation in the brain, as 
indicated by circulating proteins, is part of the cause. The results of this 
study may help us understand the importance of normal sleep and weight in terms 
of brain health.

Copyright: © 2025 Park HK et al.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.23541.2
PMCID: PMC12848887
PMID: 41614054

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.