1. Sleep. 2021 Sep 13;44(9):zsab106. doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsab106.

Homeostatic response to sleep restriction in adolescents.

Skorucak J(1)(2)(3), Weber N(4), Carskadon MA(5), Reynolds C(4), Coussens S(6), 
Achermann P(1)(2)(3)(7), Short MA(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Sleep and Health Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)School of Psychology, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia.
(5)E.P. Bradley Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, 
RI, USA.
(6)Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, University of South Australia, Adelaide, 
Australia.
(7)The KEY Institute for Brain Mind Research, Department of Psychiatry, 
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, University Hospital of Psychiatry, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Sleep. 2021 Sep 13;44(9):zsab194. doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsab194.

The high prevalence of chronic sleep restriction in adolescents underscores the 
importance of understanding how adolescent sleep is regulated under such 
conditions. One component of sleep regulation is a homeostatic process: if sleep 
is restricted, then sleep intensity increases. Our knowledge of this process is 
primarily informed by total sleep deprivation studies and has been incorporated 
in mathematical models of human sleep regulation. Several animal studies, 
however, suggest that adaptation occurs in chronic sleep restriction conditions, 
showing an attenuated or even decreased homeostatic response. We investigated 
the homeostatic response of adolescents to different sleep opportunities. 
Thirty-four participants were allocated to one of three groups with 5, 7.5, or 
10 h of sleep opportunity per night for five nights. Each group underwent a 
protocol of nine nights designed to mimic a school week between two weekends: 
two baseline nights (10 h sleep opportunity), five condition nights (5, 7.5, or 
10 h), and two recovery nights (10 h). Measures of sleep homeostasis (slow-wave 
activity and slow-wave energy) were calculated from frontal and central EEG 
derivations and compared to predictions derived from simulations of the 
homeostatic process of the two-process model of sleep regulation. Only minor 
differences were found between empirical data and model predictions, indicating 
that sleep homeostasis is preserved under chronic sleep restriction in 
adolescents. These findings improve our understanding of effects of repetitive 
short sleep in adolescents.

© Sleep Research Society 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
the Sleep Research Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/zsab106
PMID: 33893807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
