

Chronic short sleep in early life accelerates cognitive decline via disrupted proteostasis - PMC

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know 

Here's how you know 

Official websites use .gov 

A
.gov website belongs to an official
government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 

A lock (

) or https:// means you've safely
connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
information only on official, secure websites.

Search

Log in 

Dashboard

Publications

Account settings

Log out

Search…

Search NCBI

Primary site navigation

Search

Logged in as:

Dashboard

Publications

Account settings

Log in

Search PMC Full-Text Archive 

Search in PMC 

Journal List

User Guide

PERMALINK

Copy 

As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.

Learn more:
PMC Disclaimer 
|

PMC Copyright Notice

This is a preprint.

It has not yet been peer reviewed by a journal. 

The National Library of Medicine is running a pilot to include preprints that result from research funded by NIH in PMC and PubMed.

bioRxiv 
[Preprint]. 2026 Mar 30:2026.03.26.714554. [Version 1] doi: 10.64898/2026.03.26.714554 

Search in PMC 

Search in PubMed 

View in NLM Catalog 

Add to search 

Chronic short sleep in early life accelerates cognitive decline via disrupted proteostasis

Robert Komlo 
Robert Komlo 

Find articles by Robert Komlo 

, Kamalini Sengupta 
Kamalini Sengupta 

Find articles by Kamalini Sengupta 

, Ewa Strus 
Ewa Strus 

Find articles by Ewa Strus 

, Nirinjini Naidoo 
Nirinjini Naidoo 

Find articles by Nirinjini Naidoo 

Copyright and License information 

PMC Copyright notice 

PMCID: PMC13060091 PMID: 41959309 

The complete version history of this preprint is available at bioRxiv .

ABSTRACT

Chronic short sleep (CSS) is an emerging public health issue that frequently begins in adolescence and is common among healthcare professionals and others engaged in shift work. Epidemiological studies associate CSS and sleep disruption with metabolic disorders, cardiovascular disease, cognitive decline, and heightened Alzheimer’s disease risk. Building on our prior findings that sleep deprivation perturbs proteostasis and activates endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathways, we investigated the long-term consequences of CSS in young adult wild-type mice over the course of one year. Mice exposed to CSS displayed impaired cognition in hippocampal dependent tasks by 28 weeks of age, indicating emerging memory deficits. At the molecular level, CSS disrupted hippocampal proteostasis—particularly protein folding processes—and triggered ER stress and activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Importantly, disrupted proteostasis preceded the behavioral decline, with diminution of the key chaperone and UPR regulator BiP occurring at 20-22 weeks of age. CSS also increased markers of cellular stress and neuroinflammation while reducing the expression of proteins associated with memory function. Age also seemed to be a cellular stressor, causing a longitudinal increase in UPR, ISR, and neuroinflammation markers. Together, these results indicate that both chronic short sleep and age compromise proteostasis and promote neuroinflammation, contributing to progressive cognitive dysfunction.

Full Text Availability

The license terms selected by the author(s) for this preprint version do not permit archiving in PMC. The full text is available from the preprint server.

Articles from bioRxiv are provided here courtesy of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Preprints 

ACTIONS

View on publisher site 

Cite 

Collections 

Permalink 

PERMALINK

Copy 

RESOURCES

Similar articles

Cited by other articles

Links to NCBI Databases

Cite

Copy 

Download .nbib 
.nbib 

Format: 

AMA

APA

MLA

NLM

Add to Collections

Create a new collection 

Add to an existing collection 

Name your collection
* 

Choose a collection

Unable to load your collection due to an error

Please try again 

Add

Cancel

Follow NCBI

NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 

NCBI on Facebook 

NCBI on LinkedIn 

NCBI on GitHub 

NCBI RSS feed 

Connect with NLM

NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 

NLM on Facebook 

NLM on YouTube 

National Library of Medicine

8600 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20894 

Web Policies

FOIA

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

Help

Accessibility

Careers

NLM

NIH

HHS

USA.gov

Back to Top 

