The Lancet standing commission on dementia prevention, intervention and 
care, 2024. 

Professor Gill Livingston MD * Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK; Camden and Islington NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK 

Jonathan Huntley PhD Department of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK 

Kathy Y Liu MRCPsych Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK 

Professor Sergi G Costafreda PhD Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK; Camden and Islington 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK 

Professor Geir Selbӕk MD Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Ageing and Health, Vestfold Hospital Trust, 
Tønsberg, Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Geriatric 
Department, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway 

Professor Survana Alladi PhD National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, India 

Professor David Ames MD National Ageing Research Institute and University of Melbourne Academic Unit for 
Psychiatry of Old Age, Parkville and Kew, Victoria, Australia 

Professor Sube Banerjee MD Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, UK 

Professor Alistair Burns MD University of Manchester, Manchester, UK 

Professor Carol Brayne Institute of Public Health, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 

Professor Nick C Fox MD Dementia Research Centre and UK Dementia Research Institute at University College 
London, Institute of Neurology, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK 

Professor Cleusa P. Ferri Health Technology Assessment Unit, Hospital Alemão Oswaldo Cruz, São Paulo, Brazil, 
Department of Psychiatry, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil 

Professor Laura N Gitlin PhD College of Nursing and Health Professions, AgeWell Collaboratory, Drexel 
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.   

Professor Robert Howard MD Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK; Camden and Islington NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK 

Professor Helen C Kales MD Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, UC Davis School of Medicine, 
University of California, USA 

Professor Mika Kivimäki FMedSci, Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, UK, Department of 
Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 

Professor Eric B Larson MD Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington USA 

Noeline Nakasujja PhD Makerere University College of Health Sciences P Department of Psychiatry College of 
Health Sciences, Makerere University Kampala, Uganda 

1 

 
Professor Kenneth Rockwood MD Centre for the Health Care of Elderly People, Geriatric Medicine Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada 

Professor Quincy Samus PhD Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bayview, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA 

Professor Kokoro Shirai PhD Graduate School of Social and Environmental Medicine, Osaka University, Japan. 

Professor Archana Singh-Manoux PhD Université Paris Cité, Inserm, U1153 Paris, France, Division of Psychiatry, 
University College London, London, UK 

Professor Lon S Schneider MD Department of Psychiatry and the Behavioural Sciences and Department of 
Neurology, Keck School of Medicine, Leonard Davis School of Gerontology of the University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 

Sebastian Walsh MPhil Cambridge Public Health, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 

Yao Yao MD China Center for Health Development Studies, School of Public Health, Peking University, Beijing, 
China; Key Laboratory of Epidemiology of Major Diseases (Peking University), Ministry of Education, Beijing, 
China 

# Andrew Sommerlad PhD Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK; Camden and Islington NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK  

# Naaheed Mukadam PhD Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK Camden and Islington NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK 

* Corresponding author 

# These authors had an equal contribution. 

2 

 
 
 
Executive summary 
The 2024 update of the Lancet Commission on Dementia provides new, recent research evidence about 
dementia prevention, intervention, and care. 

As people live longer, the numbers who live with dementia continues to rise even as the age-specific incidence 
decreases in high income countries emphasising the need to identify and implement prevention approaches.  
We have summarised the new research since the last Lancet Commission on Dementia in 2020, showing how 
cognitive and physical reserve develop across the lifecourse and how less vascular damage is likely to have 
contributed to a reduction in age-related dementia incidence.  There is growing and stronger evidence that 
tackling many risk factors for dementia which we modelled previously (less education, hearing impairment, 
hypertension, smoking, obesity, depression, physical inactivity, diabetes, higher alcohol consumption, traumatic 
brain injury (TBI), air pollution and social isolation) reduces the risk of developing dementia.   We have added 
the new additional, compelling evidence that uncorrected vision impairment and high LDL (low density 
lipoprotein) cholesterol are risk factors for dementia.  

We have completed new meta-analyses of the risk of hearing impairment and depression for future dementia, 
reviewed and used the most recent literature on worldwide risk and prevalences of all risk factors to calculate 
new population attributable fractions for all risks. We have used these to generate a new comprehensive life-
course perspective of dementia prevention incorporating these 14 risk factors. The potential for prevention is 
high and, overall, the 14 risk factors account for nearly  half of dementias which theoretically can be prevented 
by eliminating these risks. This is very hopeful and although change is difficult, and some associations may be 
only partly causal, our new evidence synthesis shows how individuals can reduce their dementia risk and our 
new section about policy interventions which can improve dementia prevention. This is particularly so in low 
and middle-income countries (LMICs), minoritised and lower socio-economic groups where new evidence shows 
that there is often a higher burden of modifiable risk, so dementia is more likely to develop at an earlier age.  

Evidence for specific risk factors suggests that all children should be educated, and longer duration of education 
is beneficial. It is important to be cognitively, physically, and socially active in mid- and late-life, with novel 
evidence showing that mid-life cognitive activity makes a difference even in those who received little education. 
The evidence that treating hearing loss  decreases the risk of dementia is now stronger. Using hearing aids 
appears particularly effective in those with hearing loss and other risk factors for dementia. There is also new 
evidence that treating depression and smoking cessation may both reduce dementia risk.  

We report the new evidence that reducing air pollution is linked with better cognition and less dementia. Policy 
makers should also improve air quality, particularly in areas with higher air pollution. Traumatic brain injury (TBI) 
at any age and from any source, continues to be a risk factor for dementia and there is now new and better 
evidence that this is true in contact sports. This leads to additional and new recommendations that protection 
from head injury by appropriate head protection equipment, limiting high-impact collisions and heading practice 
in sports training, and avoiding playing immediately after TBI, should be an individual and public health priority. 

There is new evidence that reducing the risk of dementia increases healthy years of life and compresses the 
duration of ill health for people who develop it. Prevention approaches should aim to decrease risk factor levels 
early (the earlier, the better) and keep them low throughout life (the longer, the better). While starting early is 
desirable, there is also benefit from tackling risk throughout life, it is never too early or too late to reduce 
dementia risk. Much of the evidence suggests mid-life, interventions but some risk factors have their origins at 
societal levels and across the lifecourse. All the risk factors covered can be seen as having potential for risk 

3 

reduction at scale through policy changes that affect risk across the lifecourse. There is now additional evidence 
that these changes are often cost saving and clarity for the first time that risk can be modified even in those with 
higher genetic risk. 

The field of biomarkers has moved on with fluid biomarkers more widely validated, although much of the work 
is in people seen in tertiary centres who differ from most people with dementia. There is more clarity about the 
meaning of these changes. Amyloid and tau biomarkers in those with dementia help confirm the presence of 
Alzheimer’s disease pathology although not that it is the cause of symptoms. Amyloid accumulation occurs many 
years before dementia. Amyloid biomarkers are common in older individuals who do not have cognitive 
impairment, most of whom will not develop dementia over their lifetime. The presence of both amyloid and tau 
biomarkers increases the probability of dementia; markers of neurodegeneration further increase this risk. The 
vision of blood biomarkers as a scalable test to predict who will develop dementias is progressing but is not yet 
realised.  

For those living with dementia, interventions post-diagnosis help, including maximising physical health, 
improving quality of life, reducing hospitalisations and planning for the future.  Interventions should be 
individualised and consider the person’s life circumstances and include family and other carers. There is 
considerably more evidence about multicomponent psychosocial interventions for family carers and managing 
neuropsychiatric symptoms. These are important and should be person-centred.  

Cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer’s and Lewy Body dementias have new evidence of beneficial long as well 
as short-term effects and should be available but are still not in many countries. We know less about anti-
amyloid antibody treatments. It is encouraging that for the first time a small number of trials have reported a 
small amount of decreased cognitive deterioration in the intervention group with substantially reduced amyloid 
in the brain. These have a small effect in reducing deterioration after 18-months of treatment (by 27-35%), but 
are expensive, burdensome to use, require intensive monitoring and follow-up and can have significant and 
sometimes serious side -effects. There is currently no evidence on longer-term effects and safety.  

COVID-19 exposed the vulnerability of people with dementia. We need to learn from these new observations to 
ensure that those who are vulnerable are protected and that the lives and wellbeing of those with dementia, 
and their families, are valued. 

Strapline 
The substantial advances in understanding protection and risk, and pharmacological and non-pharmacological 
interventions in dementia means that now more than ever we can prevent, diagnose, and treat dementia, 
improving life for individuals, families, and society. 

Key messages 

Two new modifiable risk factors for dementia 
•  New evidence supports adding vision impairment and high cholesterol as potentially modifiable risk factors 
for dementia to add to the 12 risk factors identified in our 2020 Lancet Commission (less education, head 
injury, physical inactivity, smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, hypertension, obesity, diabetes, hearing 
impairment, depression, infrequent social contact, and air pollution).  

14 risk factors account for nearly half of the risk for dementia. Modifying them may prevent or delay dementia. 
•  Be ambitious about prevention. Prevention involves both policy changes at national and international 

governmental levels and individually tailored interventions. Population-based policy should prioritise equity 
and ensure that high risk groups are included.  Actions to decrease dementia risk should begin early and 

4 

continue throughout life. Risk is clustered in individuals and interventions therefore will often be 
multicomponent. 

•  Risk is modifiable irrespective of APOE genetic status. Multicomponent interventions addressing several risk 

factors potentially benefit individuals with either high or low genetic dementia risk. 

Specific actions to reduce dementia risk across the life course. 
•  Good quality education for all. Cognitively stimulating activities in midlife also protect cognition.  
•  Hearing aids to be accessible for people with hearing loss. Reduce hearing loss by lowering harmful noise 

exposure. 

•  Treat depression effectively. 
•  Encourage use of helmets and head protection in contact sports and on bikes 
•  Encourage exercise. People who participate in sport and exercise are less likely to develop dementia. 
•  Reduce cigarette smoking by education, price control and preventing smoking in public places. Make 

smoking cessation advice accessible.  

•  Reduce hypertension. Aim to prevent hypertension and maintain systolic BP of 130 mm Hg or less from age 

40 years. 

•  Detect and treat high cholesterol (low density lipoprotein cholesterol, LDL-C) from midlife. 
•  Maintain healthy weight. Treating obesity as early as possible also helps prevent diabetes. 
•  Reduce high alcohol consumption through price control and increased awareness of levels and risks of over 

consumption. 

•  Prioritise age-friendly and supportive community environments and housing.  Reduces social isolation by 

facilitating participation in activities and living with others. 

•  Make screening and treatment for vision impairment accessible for all. 
•  Reduce exposure to air pollution. 
For those with dementia, recommendations are: 
• 

Interventions post-diagnosis help people to live well with dementia, including planning for the future. 
Multicomponent coping interventions for family carers and managing neuropsychiatric symptoms are 
important and should be person-centred. 

•  Treat neuropsychiatric symptoms. Activity interventions are important to maintain enjoyment and purpose 
for people with dementia and reduce neuropsychiatric symptoms. There is no evidence for exercise as an 
intervention for neuropsychiatric symptoms.  

•  Cholinesterase Inhibitors and memantine for Alzheimer’s dementia are cheap with relatively few side-

effects. They attenuate cognitive deterioration to a modest extent.  There is good evidence that they have 
an effect for years. They are available in most high-income countries but less so in low- and middle-Income 
countries.   

•  There is progress in disease modifying treatment for Alzheimer’s disease with some trials showing modest 
efficacy in reducing deterioration after 18-months of treatment. These findings are exciting and give hope, 
but effects are small, and drugs have been trialled in mild disease and people with few other illnesses. They 
have been licensed in some countries. They have significant side -effects with little data about longer term 
effects. Their expense and the precautions which must be taken, which have resource implications for staff, 
scanning and specialist blood testing will reduce their use now and will be challenging for health systems.  

•  CSF or blood biomarkers should currently only be used clinically in those with dementia or cognitive 

impairment to help confirm or exclude a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s dementia. They are only validated in 
largely white populations, limiting generalisability, and raising health equity concerns. 

5 

•  Covid-19 exposed the vulnerability of people with dementia. We need to learn from this and protect those 
with dementia as their (and their families) lives and wellbeing have been valued less than those without 
dementia. 

6 

 
 
Introduction 
We reconvened the Lancet Commission on dementia prevention, intervention, and care (1, 2)  with the aim of 
influencing policy, knowledge, clinical practice, and the research agenda. There has been exciting progress in 
dementia prevention, diagnosis, drug and non-pharmacological treatment. We now know that more can and 
should be done to prevent dementia and to help people living with dementia and their families. Our 
interdisciplinary, international, multicultural group of experts adopted a triangulation framework, prioritising 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses and performing new meta-analyses where needed. Each commissioner 
chosen from a wide geographical and cultural range to incorporate diverse viewpoints, wrote at least one 
section and each was presented and debated face to face as well as in multiple written versions. We 
unanimously agreed on the best available evidence and its consistency. We identified advances likely to have 
the greatest impact, performed new work to allow us to calculate potentially modifiable risk factors for 
dementia, (2, 3) report our new analyses, and consolidate current knowledge. We summarise the balance of 
evidence about prevention, intervention, and care.   

The number of people living with dementia worldwide in 2019 was estimated at 57 million and is projected to 
increase to 153 million by 2050.(4)  The overall numbers of people with dementia have increased more recently 
in lower income countries due to greater  percentage increase in longevity. (5, 6)  

In this third Lancet Commission on dementia report, we summarise what was already known by stating what we 
reported in previous commissions. This comes from research over decades by people from around the world. 
We then build on it, explain new evidence, reference it, and produce new evidence, integrating it all to make 
updated recommendations.  We specifically consider populations in both high-income countries (HICs) and low- 
and middle-income countries (LMICs), and underrepresented, underserved and minoritised communities in all 
countries where evidence is available.  The evidence is still disproportionately from HICs. Interventions may also 
be more likely in HICs as they depend on resource availability,  despite potentially being cost-saving.(7) (8, 9) 
Most (31 of 46) countries’ national dementia plans do not make specific recommendations for the consideration 
of diversity, equity or inclusion of those from underrepresented cultures and ethnicities,(10) and those that do 
usually confine their recommendations to interpretation of cognitive tests.(11) As we set out below, considering 
these factors for all cultures and ethnicities in all types of dementia is essential to target help to those who need 
it most.  

Prevention 
There has been an explosion of work on dementia prevention and risk reduction relating to reducing the 12 
factors identified from the large research literature and added to by our work in our earlier Lancet commissions 
(2017, 2020), with the potential to prevent 40% of cases of dementia (less education, hearing loss, hypertension, 
physical inactivity, diabetes, social isolation, excessive alcohol consumption, air pollution, smoking, obesity, 
traumatic brain injury, depression).(2)  We discussed mechanisms for these 12 risk factors which indicated that 
risk at any age might be reduced.  

Here we update the evidence and consider other potential risk factors. We use a lifecourse approach to 
understand how to reduce risk or prevent dementia, as many risks operate at different timepoints in the 
lifespan. For example, obesity and high blood pressure (BP) represent risk factors in mid-life, often with earlier 
life origins, but in late-life may reduce if people are developing mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia. 
(12-14) As before, we look for risk factors with high-quality, consistent, dose respondent, validly measured 
evidence, which precedes dementia and remain when measured a decade or more before onset. We only 
include those with convincing evidence, while acknowledging there are likely to be other risk and protective 
factors. The commissioners met and discussed the evidence and what to include and set out our discussions and 

7 

 
the evidence in the paper.. We discussed new biologically plausible evidence about mechanisms linking a risk 
factor to dementia and when there is new evidence, we present it and summarise previous evidence about 
mechanisms to give a balanced picture. We do not, however, aim to give a complete, detailed review of all 
mechanisms. We also discuss if evidence is from diverse populations and therefore generalisable, and if there is 
evidence that intervention makes a difference.  

Compression of morbidity  
Data from some HICs suggest a decline in age-specific incidence rates (15) highlighting the importance of 
prevention. There are less data from LMICs. Where these have examined the relationship with deprivation, the 
decline is primarily in those in socio-economically advantaged areas.(15) This suggests that many dementias are 
potentially preventable (and deferrable) but age-specific rates may increase if risks, such as diabetes or obesity, 
prevalence increases and this may be particularly in those with less education. A recent English study suggests 
this may be happening already although there is uncertainty with more evidence needed. (16) (17, 18) 

Those with a healthy lifestyle, involving regular exercise, not smoking, avoiding excess alcohol, and late life 
cognitive activity, not only have a lower risk of dementia, but dementia onset was also pushed back further than 
life expectancy prolongation. (19)  Overall, those living healthier lives can expect to live longer, and if they 
develop dementia, live less years with it – with significant quality of life implications for individuals and cost-
saving implications for services. 

Cognitive vulnerability, brain maintenance and cognitive reserve 
As discussed in the last commission, neuropathological changes do not inevitably lead to dementia. Most older 
people with dementia have several types of neuropathology. One study of six community cohorts, comprising 
4,354 people aged >80 years who had died in the US or UK, analysed six types of neuropathology and found 91% 
of people died with two or more types of neuropathology.(20) The more types of neuropathology people had 
the more likely they were to have dementia (see figure 1), but some people with many neuropathologies had 
not developed dementia.  

The ability to withstand neuropathology before showing the symptoms of dementia is described as cognitive 
reserve. Sometimes the term resilience or brain reserve is also used as coping with pathology and resistance to 
neuropathology. People who are physically healthier are better able to withstand the effects of neuropathology. 
(21)  Thus, while the age-related incidence of dementia has decreased in some countries over the last 25 years, 
one post-mortem study showed no differences in neurodegeneration but a reduction in vascular pathology.(22)  
A systematic review found that physical, cognitive and social activities increase cognitive reserve and attenuate 
the effect of neuropathology. (23) Overall, greater cognitive and physical reserve(21) developed across the 
lifecourse, preserving cognitive health despite neuropathology, and less vascular damage are likely to have 
contributed to the reduced age-related dementia incidence.(24) Nonetheless, the numbers of people with 
dementia continue to rise due to population ageing.  

8 

 
 
 
Figure 1 Co-occurrence of six key neuropathologies by clinical dementia status from data pooled across five 
cohorts (Adult Changes in Thought. Cambridge City over-75s Cohort Study. Cognitive Function and Ageing 
Studies. Framingham Heart Study. Limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy neuropathologic 
change. Religious Orders Study and Memory and Aging Project). with permission (20) LATE-NC= Limbic-
predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy 

The challenges of research into prevention and risk reduction in dementia 

Lifecourse nature of exposures to protection and risk 
There are many factors that operate across the lifecourse from pregnancy through to later life. These are 
challenging to track, and our evidence base is necessarily limited to what is studied at particular ages. Here, we 
look at evidence directly related to dementia. However, there is much broader evidence that we do not capture 
on early life optimal brain growth and exposure to adversity and its impact on cognition, vascular health and on 
physical and cognitive activities. Educational exposure has strong protective evidence. In this Commission we 
use the language of risk, and then discuss protection which can mitigate both the risks and illness arising from 
the risks and is an important opportunity for the future.  

Effects of the long prodrome before dementia-identification and intervention 
The long preclinical phase of some dementias over more than a decade is characterised by progressive 
neuropathological changes, such as amyloid or tau accumulation before Alzheimer’s dementia (AD), which 
initially have few cognitive effects, that may increase over many years.(25) There can be changes in behaviour 

9 

 
 
 
and health long before dementia, so potential risks identified in the few years before dementia could be either 
or both a true causal effect or reverse causation. This can be the case even when studies report the mean cohort 
follow-up time, this may vary between those who develop dementia (as it is censored at dementia onset) and 
those who do not. Future studies should report the mean follow-up of those who develop and do not develop 
dementia separately or test the effect of excluding incident cases which develop within 5-10 years of follow-up.  

There are many methodological difficulties with designing and conducting intervention trials in dementia 
prevention, including ensuring sufficient follow-up duration, recruitment of participants from high risk or 
excluded groups, and adherence to and making changes that are associated with better cognitive functioning 
trajectories,(26) but adherence decreases with increasing intervention complexity and intensity.(27) It can be 
more difficult to demonstrate an intervention’s benefit in RCTs if the control group is highly motivated to also 
take up the intervention. Benefit may stop or decrease if the intervention does not continue.  

Causes of dementia 
Strokes (including those caused by atrial fibrillation), Parkinson’s disease, HIV, and syphilis, are causes of 
dementia rather than risk factors, and we do not include them here as risk factors. Vascular dementia is usually 
related to stroke (and is specified in the diagnostic criteria) which can be both symptomatic or without motor 
symptoms and detected on imaging. These happens more often in people with many potentially modifiable risk 
factors, such as smoking, hypertension and diabetes. (28)  

Length and timing of exposure to possible risk factors 
The duration, consistency, and timing of exposure to possible risk may be important with recent studies finding, 
for example, that mid-life diabetes is a risk factor for dementia, but diabetes may not be a risk in those whose 
diabetes onset is in late-life. (29) It is unclear whether this is because of shorter duration of exposure in those 
who develop it in late-life, more severe diabetes or whether there is a critical period of exposure. It may be if 
people with late-life diabetes live long enough, they may also be at greater risk of dementia. Other risk factors, 
such as smoking, which the evidence now suggests is a risk factor in midlife, clearly also confers risk in late life.  

Clustering of risk factors 
Important social disadvantage such as less education, more social isolation and lower socioeconomic status tend 
to cluster with health factors that predict cognitive decline and dementia. (30) People therefore often have 
several risk factors which may act together, and this means it is important to consider communality.  We have 
chosen to consider risks individually and correct for communality, rather than consider different risk profiles. 

Diversity, Equity and Inclusivity 
We have previously considered prevention and risk reduction on a global level using international data on 
prevalence of risk factors and relative risks (RR) from meta-analyses where possible.(1, 2) Consideration of 
equity is important, not only ethically but also to inform intervention targeting and accessibility to maximise 
preventative impact. (31) Many ‘big data’ sources from volunteers by their nature exclude those most at 
risk.(32) In addition, some of the big cohort studies like UK Biobank also recruit younger volunteers and while 
this is positive for the exclusion of reverse causality, currently most people have not reached the age where 
dementia is more common and therefore finding  Cohort studies of dementia risk factors and therefore meta-
analyses are overwhelmingly from HICs, and within these cohorts, recruit people of European origin, more 
education, and higher socioeconomic status, and more usually of older age groups with few people from 
minority ethnic groups. (33) This also applies to clinical trials and for both may relate to exclusion criteria, 

10 

 
  
specifying other significant medical and psychiatric illnesses, lack of a study partner, inability to shoulder 
research participation burden and lack of local language fluency. (34, 35) 

 Risk factor prevalence varies between countries(36) as well as within countries.(37)  A meta-analysis of 31 
studies from 15 Latin American countries showed twice as many people without any education compared to 
those with one or more year (21.4% versus 9.9%) had dementia and a slightly higher prevalence in rural than 
urban and women versus men.(31) Risk factors cluster within communities and individuals. Underserved ethnic 
groups, such as the Māori group in New Zealand, First Nation groups in Australia, Black individuals in the US and 
UK, and Hispanic individuals in the US, have higher prevalence of potentially modifiable risk factors.(38-45) 
Furthermore, the literature and therefore our commissions have assumed that the impact of having each risk 
factor is the same for everyone. In contrast, cardiovascular disease research has found that the effect of, for 
example, high BP effect on the risk of stroke is greater in minority ethnic groups in the UK compared to the 
White British population and risk factors effect for dementia may vary between ethnic groups.(46, 47)    

Socio-economic status 
The effect of socioeconomic status on prevalence of some risk factors can vary between countries. There is a 
higher prevalence of hypertension, diabetes, obesity, physical inactivity, smoking, excessive alcohol, less 
education, traumatic brain injury (TBI) and exposure to air pollution in those from lower socioeconomic groups 
in HICs,  and with lower  income level.(48-50)  In LIC, reported lower prevalences of obesity or diabetes in those 
with less wealth or education are inconsistent.(51) (52)  Social isolation is seen less in some LIC. 34   

Female sex and gender 
Biological sex – the physical differences between people from sex chromosomes and reproductive organs is 
usually noted at birth and people are assigned a sex. Lived gender is how a person identifies on the spectrum of 
gender. They are increasingly recognised as separable in societies for some people. Biological sex, hormonal 
exposure and societal roles are all potentially important in influencing risk of dementia syndrome and its 
expression in later life. Findings about the effect of biological sex on risk of dementia are inconsistent.(53) 
Women have higher age-adjusted dementia incidence rates than men in some but not all countries.(54) One 
meta-analysis with nearly a million people from 205 studies in 37 countries found that increased rates of 
dementia in women compared to men  were explained by differences in life expectancy and education. (54) An 
individual participant -analysis (IPA) found widely varying results in individual countries. (55) Overall 21 cohorts 
with 29,850 participants across Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, Australia, and South America found an HR of 
1.12 (1.02, 1.23) of women compared to men. The first nationally representative dementia prevalence estimates 
in India found higher prevalence in women, people with less education, and rurality. (56, 57) In both HICs and 
LMICs there is evidence that risk is related to other factors than biological sex. It has been hypothesised that 
longer life span, less educational attainment and reduced oestrogen in postmenopausal women could cause sex 
differences in dementia development. A representative nationwide study in Japan of 2200 adults followed from 
age 60 for 12 years or until death, found that lower educational attainment and domestic work or manual labour 
occupations accounted for women’s lower baseline cognitive scores and more cognitive decline over the years 
of follow-up. (58)  A UK study of 15,924 participants found that women born more recently were catching up 
with men’s higher memory and fluency scores, as women’s access to education increases.(59)  Analysis of 
70,846 people aged ≥60 years in US, Mexico, Brazil, China, and India found adjustment for education attenuated 
men and women’s cognitive difference and eliminated it in the high education group in high and middle-income 
countries.(60) This difference between countries suggests that increased risk in women is related in part to lack 
of opportunity in work and education, leading to more poverty and less access to medical care and 
discrimination, all of which vary between cultures rather than biology. (61) While there is relatively little 

11 

knowledge about risks of dementia in those who have the same sex partner, one US study of 23,669 adults aged 
over 50 found a higher risk of cognitive impairment in those with a same sex rather than opposite sex partner. 
(62) However, cisgender men and women have fewer risk factors for late-life dementia on average than 
transgender men or women. (63) 

Methods to consider causality. 
While randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are the gold-standard in establishing intervention effectiveness, and 
therefore causality of risk factors, they are often impractical for dementia. Trials may require decades of 
intervention and follow-up before clinical dementia occurs, leading to prohibitive costs and bias because of 
selective drop-out. It may be unethical or impossible to randomise people. Causal inference methods, quasi-
experimental or ecological studies may add to the evidence. (64) A Cochrane review comparing studies of 
healthcare outcomes (not dementia specifically)  which assessed quantitative effects of RCTs and observational 
studies of interventions found 23/34 reported substantially the same effect estimates from RCTs and 
observational studies.(65)  Differences were found when there was high heterogeneity in meta-analysis (>50%). 
One approach is to study the effects of intervention implemented at a particular time, such as reduction in air 
pollution or increase in education for a whole population. Another is Mendelian randomisation (MR) analyses 
which we have, for the first time, incorporated in our triangulation framework where possible, to help to 
establish causation. MR is a causal inference method, based on alleles being randomly allocated at conception, 
so their association with a risk cannot be caused by a later disease. This assumes that behaviours and mood are 
partly genetically driven and can only be used where there is sufficient genetic diversity influencing a particular 
risk factor in the population studied. MR is also limited by factors such as survival bias, which is likely to account 
for controversial MR findings which are in the opposite direction to RCT findings. (66) (67)  

Specific potentially modifiable risk factors for dementia 
Dementia prevention efforts should take a nuanced and tailored approach for different groups and seek to 
reduce structural and sociocultural barriers to engagement of higher risk groups. Trials and research databases 
should aim for sociodemographic diversity to reflect real life populations.  In the next sections, we briefly 
describe relevant newly published and illustrative research studies that add to the 2020 commission’s evidence 
base about protective and risk factors for the development of dementia. We discuss where in the life course the 
evidence suggests they begin to be important given the constraints of ages at which evidence is studied.(2) 
While some risk factors, like hypertension, evolve and change during the life course, others such as alcohol or 
smoking may be more consistent.  We summarise potential mechanisms of protection from dementia in Figure 
2. 

12 

Figure 2. Possible brain mechanisms for enhancing or maintaining cognitive reserve and risk reduction of 
potentially modifiable risk factors in dementia. 

Education, educational attainment, and cognitive activity 
We previously reported that those with more childhood education and higher educational attainment have a 
reduced dementia risk, and discussed whether effects of later cognitive stimulation might be due to people with 
more education having more cognitively stimulating occupations.(2) Differences in the quality of education, as 
measured by reading levels at age 14 to 15, have been estimated to account for about half of the US disparities 
in dementia prevalence across racial groups.(68) Overall, it appears to be educational attainment, not the 
related years of education, which drives the protective effect for future cognition and dementia. (69, 70) 

In China, studies 20 years apart, using the same methods and geographical area, find that dementia incidence 
and prevalence has increased specifically in those with less than 6 years of education, possibly because this is a 
population that is now more likely to survive to older age. (71)  In the US there has been a decline in dementia, 
in parallel with more education for all the diverse US population. Reported dementia prevalence  has fallen 
more steeply in Black people aged 65 to 74 years, in line with the greater improvement in education.(72) In 
Asian Americans attaining a university degree is associated with lower dementia risk.(73)  

A study of 107,896 people from HICs followed for 13.7-30.1 years found a lower risk of dementia in participants 
with high compared with low cognitive stimulation at work (10-year follow-up HR= 0.79, 0.66 – 0.95).(74) Those 
with high cognitive stimulation at work but little education had an 80% (0.66-0.97) risk of dementia and those 
with high cognitive stimulation and high education had a 63% (0.49-0.82) risk, compared to those with little 
education and low work cognitive stimulation (see Figure 3). There were similar results in a study from Asia, 
Australia, Europe, and North America following 10,195 people for 3.9 ─6.4 years, where both high school 
education and occupational complexity were independently associated with increased dementia-free survival 
time, with 28% of the effect of education mediated by occupational complexity.(75) However, a US study found 

13 

 
 
 
that years of schooling predicted protection against the effect of MRI white matter lesions in White but not 
Black people. (76) Globally, educational attainment has increased over time but remains relatively low in some 
countries, so is of great relevance when considering dementia prevention and overall health. (77) 

With permission Figure 3 Association of cognitive stimulation over the life course with incident dementia (74) 

Mechanism 
Higher cognitive stimulation has been associated with cognitive reserve and the ability to maintain this through 
multiple mechanisms. These include the level of circulating proteins to allow brain repair through axonogenesis 
and synaptogenesis, (74) greater efficiency of and less decline in functional brain networks,(78, 79) increased 
occupational attainment linked with improved financial situation leading to choices about where to live, better 
physical health through better health care access and health awareness, and other health promoting 
behaviours. An MR study found the effect of years of education (measured by genes predicting this) was 
mediated by intelligence (measured by genes linked to IQ test performance).(80)  

Education and cognitive interventions in normal cognition and mild cognitive impairment 
In the previous Lancet commission, we reported that trials of computerised cognitive training (CCT) in healthy 
older people and those with mild cognitive impairment  generally suggested a small positive effect on cognition, 
but it was unclear whether CCT was of clinical value because of the low standard and heterogeneity of 
studies.(81) An updated Cochrane review of CCT interventions for maintaining cognitive function in cognitively 
healthy older individuals, delivered over 12 to 26 weeks, also found low-quality evidence supporting immediate 
small benefits of CCT on global cognitive function versus active controls and on episodic memory versus inactive 
control, without long-term evidence of effect.(82) It is important to note that short term, low intensity CCT 
interventions, which can be financially costly, have only low quality evidence of short-term effectiveness  and 
none of long term effectiveness  in maintaining cognition.  It is possible that the cognitive training in these trials 
does not cover the breadth of cognitive function or is not intensive or engaging enough or is too late in life to 
preserve cognitive function. Exposure to cognitive stimulation at work reduces risk of dementia and is of longer 
duration than cognitive interventions or cognitively stimulating hobbies. (74) 

Hearing loss and hearing aids 
Globally, an estimated 20% of people have hearing loss, sometimes related to occupational or environmental 
exposures to noise  or untreated infections; 62% of them are aged over 50 years, and it is often untreated.(83) In 
our previous Lancet Commissions we performed a meta-analysis of high-quality cohort studies with participants 
free of dementia but with objectively measured peripheral hearing loss at baseline. (1, 2)  We defined high 
quality as objective measures of hearing through pure-tone assessment, > 5 years follow-up, adjusted for age, 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
      
      
 
 
 
cardiovascular factors and cognition or education at baseline and an overall risk for the outcome of incident 
dementia. There are four further meta-analyses on the association between hearing loss and subsequent 
dementia,  (84-87) one of which focussed on Sinitic tonal languages.(86) They all found a significant association 
between hearing loss and subsequent dementia ranging from 1.28 (1.02-1.5)(84) to 2.39 (1.58 – 3.61).(85)   
None of these included all the criteria that we judged ensured high-quality data in our previous meta-analysis. 
We also excluded studies comparing populations with varying severities of hearing loss, but not comparing 
hearing loss individuals with those with normal hearing. We searched again until March 20, 2023, on PubMed, 
Ovid Embase, PsycINFO, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, PROSPERO, and Centre for Reviews and 
Dissemination,  contacting authors for clarification as needed and found six studies fitting the criteria (see 
appendix  page 1-2 for search strategy and results)(88-93) We calculated totals if only subgroups were reported, 
generating an overall HR for studies.(89, 91, 92) We used results unadjusted for hearing aids as they are in the 
causal pathway between hearing loss and dementia. (92-94)   The baseline age of study participants ranged from 
59 to 77 years, average =59 with the largest study recruiting participants at age 18 to 20 but measuring hearing 
status at mean age 59. (91)  Follow-up between baseline hearing and dementia status was between 6 and 12 
years (average 7 years). In random effect meta-analysis, people with hearing loss had an increased risk of 
dementia compared to those with normal hearing (HR 1.37, 1.00-1.87, I2 =80%, n=666,370) see figure 4. Four of 
the smaller studies reported hearing aid use, and between 18 and 64.5% of those with hearing loss wore hearing 
aids. (88-90, 93) All people with hearing loss were included, without considering use of hearing aids in the 
overall risk estimate, so it is a conservative estimate. In our meta-regression, studies with more people who 
wore hearing aids found a lower likelihood of dementia, but this had wide confidence intervals (-1.32; -3.34-
0.71).   

Figure 4 Relative risk of dementia for people with hearing impairment at baseline compared to those without 
hearing impairment.  

As severity of hearing loss increases, dementia risk increases: all four studies which have investigated dose-
response between hearing and dementia risk have found that every 10 dB decrease in hearing ability increases 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
dementia risk. (89, 90, 95, 96) The magnitude of this risk increase varies between studies, from 4%(95)    to 24% 
(90) increase of dementia risk per 10 dB worse hearing.  

Specific speech-in-noise (SiN) loss is rarer where the deficit is understanding speech where other sounds are 
present. The only large study to date where SiN was objectively measured is from UK Biobank, n=82 039; 100 
people with SiN loss, followed for a median of 10 years). Compared to normal hearing, impaired SiN hearing was 
associated with a 61% (HR = 1.61, 1.41–1.84) and poor SiN with a 91% (HR 1.91, 1.55–2.36) increase in 
dementia.(97)   
Mechanisms  
There are several hypothesised mechanisms as to how hearing loss might increase dementia risk. Psychosocial 
factors such as loneliness, depression and social isolation may be involved. Other mechanisms include reduced 
cognitive reserve from lack of environmental stimuli, increased cognitive resources needed for listening and an 
interaction of these risks with brain pathology.(98)  This is consistent with longer exposure to hearing loss being 
associated with higher dementia risk, with maximum risk in those diagnosed with hearing loss for more than 25 
years. (99)  Another postulated mechanism is that common cardiovascular pathology causes hearing loss and 
dementia, when cardiovascular health status or risks would substantially account for the association between 
hearing loss and dementia risk, but this has not been reported.(98)  

Effect of correction of hearing impairment 
This evidence raises the question of whether treating hearing loss with hearing aids can eliminate or mitigate 
this increased dementia risk. The ACHIEVE study, the first RCT of hearing aids recruited healthy volunteers from 
advertisements (N=739), or older adults from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC, N=238) study.(100)  
There was no overall effect on the primary outcome, cognition at three-year follow-up (difference -0·002,  –0·08 
–  0·08). Importantly, a pre-specified analysis found substantial effects in the ARIC subgroup in cognition at three 
years, (difference 0·19, 0·02 -0·36). The ARIC population had more dementia risk factors (2.8 years older, lower 
baseline cognition, smoked more, less education, more often lived alone, more likely to have diabetes and 
hypertension). Cognitive decline was higher in the ARIC group (24%) than in people who answered adverts (8%) 
at 3 years follow-up. This volunteer response bias resulted in insufficient statistical power to detect any 
difference.  Overall, there was a large (48%) protective effect of hearing aids on cognition in a high-risk 
population. The explanation of the large effect in ARIC may be that hearing aids in high risk groups also change 
social contact, low mood, cognitive stimulation and improve motivation and communication about medical 
treatment but as yet we do not have evidence of this.(101)  

We previously discussed the evidence that hearing aid use is protective against dementia and reduces cognitive 
deterioration rates after hearing aid use began.(2) A more recent systematic review and meta-analysis of 8 
cohort studies with 126,903 participants, followed for 2 to 25 years, reported that people with hearing 
impairment who used hearing aids had a 19% (0.76-0.87; I2 = 0%) lower risk of cognitive decline and a 17% (0.77-
0.90; I2 = 0%, 4 studies) lower risk of dementia, compared to those with uncorrected hearing impairment (see 
figure 5).(102)   

16 

 
Figure 5. Longitudinal association of hearing aid use and cognitive decline 

Pooled hazard ratio in random-effects meta-analysis. Weights are from random-effects analysis. Created with 
data 

In another cohort of 2114 people aged >50 years, with self-reported hearing-impairment, 1154 had MCI and 
those that used hearing aids were at significantly lower risk of developing all-cause dementia over follow-up 
compared to those not using hearing aids (HR 0.73, 0.61 – 0.89).(103) The median time to incident dementia 
was 2 years for non–hearing aid users and 4 years for hearing aid users.  

The observational evidence of the benefits of hearing aids for dementia risk is increasing. Even if we only 
consider the studies with long follow up to reduce reverse causality, the evidence on hearing aids reducing 
dementia risk is consistent and supportive. Implementing hearing aids, if effective in preventing dementia would 
likely be cost-saving.(7) 

Depression  
In the 2020 Lancet commission we concluded based on published studies that the relationship between 
depression and dementia was probably bidirectional and that in the years before dementia, depression can be a 
symptom of evolving dementia; a reaction to cognitive impairment; or a cause of cognitive impairment. We also 
noted that few studies had considered whether risk of dementia was affected by treatment. 
A new meta-analysis found depression was associated with all-cause dementia although there was a high degree 
of between studies heterogeneity (RR 1.96, 1.59-2.43; I2= 96.5%; 27 studies). (104)  For this commission, we 
performed a random effects meta-analysis using the seven studies with a 10 to 14-year follow-up (104-111)  and 
found an increased risk of dementia (RR 2.25, 1.69 -2.98 I2= 82.8%) see figure 6. Six studies which specified the 
age of participants had baseline average age of 63 years. Although the studies were heterogenous in the effect 
size, they consistently found a higher risk including in those which matched participants for age, sex, 
socioeconomic status, and comorbidities.  Similarly, a later Danish case-control study of 246 499 adults 
diagnosed with depression at baseline, at median age 51,  found a higher risk of dementia among those 

17 

 
 
diagnosed with depression (HR 2.41,2.35-2.47), after 20 to 39 years  (HR 1.79, 1.58-2.04) and in those diagnosed 
with depression in early, middle, or late life (18-44 years: HR 3.08; 2.64-3.58; 45-59 years: HR 2.95; 2.75-3.17; 60 
years: HR 2.31; 2.25-2.38).(112) 
A Swedish nationwide study of 41,727 twins with 18-year follow up found that dementia risk was increased for  
mid- and late-life and lifelong depression: mid-life, OR 1.46 (1.09-1.95), late-life 2.16 (1.82-2.56), and lifelong 
depression 2.65 (1.17-5.98).(113)  
Overall, these studies suggest that depression increases the risk of dementia at all adult ages, although in late 
life some of the association is caused by preclinical dementia. We are therefore classifying it as a midlife risk 
factor as there is clear mid-life risk. The findings about the effect of both medication and therapy treatment in 
reducing the risk now suggests it is important to treat depression both for quality of life and because it may 
reduce the risk of later dementia.  

Figure 6 Meta-analysis of risk of developing dementia 10 to 14 years after depression diagnosis compared to 
those who were not depressed. 

Mechanisms 
There was no difference between identical or non-identical twins in the study above, leading to the conclusion 
that the risk was not accounted for by genetic risk or early life environment, but the risk of mid-life depression 
and future dementia was lower in those with more than eight years education. (113) Mechanisms linking 
depression to dementia risk remain unknown although depression is related to reduced self-care and social 

18 

 
 
contact. Another hypothesised mechanism by which depression might increase dementia could be over-
secretion of cortisol leading to hippocampal atrophy or inflammatory response.(114) 

Interventions for depression 
A UKB study of interventions for depression included 354,313 participants aged 50–70 years without dementia, 
followed up for a median of 11.9 years,(115) finding that people with a diagnosis of depression (n=46,280) had a 
higher risk of developing dementia (HR 1.51, 1.38–1.63). Those who were treated for depression (medication 
14695, psychotherapy=2151, combination = 5281) were less likely to develop dementia than the untreated 
group (overall HR 0.69, 0.62–0.77; pharmacotherapy HR 0.77, 0.65–0.91; psychotherapy HR 0.74, 0.58–0.94; and 
combination therapy HR 0.62, 0.53–0.73). The untreated group who remitted did not have a higher risk of 
dementia than the nondepressed group (HR 0.84, 0.56–1.24).  This is a larger group and for a longer period 
compared to previous evidence(116, 117) but remains open to bias of observational studies. However, it is 
unlikely there will be such long term RCTs.   

Traumatic Brain Injury 
We meta-analysed the risk of all-cause dementia following TBI in the 2020 commission (RR 1·84, 1·54–2·20).(2) 
Subsequently two meta-analyses reported similar figures. The first, including 21 studies, totalling 8,684,485 
people, reported OR 1.81 (1.53-2.14) for TBI and risk of dementia. (118) A meta-analysis of 32 studies (n= 
7,634,844), which included 17 studies from the other meta-analysis, found a RR for dementia after TBI of 1.66 
(1.42-1.93). (119)  Both of these studies found that younger age (<65 years) and male sex were associated with 
higher risk.  
In LMICs, TBI occurs most commonly from road traffic accidents but in HICs it is most commonly because of falls 
or violence, with alcohol a common contributory factor. (120) TBI risk is therefore linked to other health 
behaviours which are risk factors for dementia. A large (n= 32,385) national Finnish prospective longitudinal 
study found the association between major TBI (>3 days hospitalisation) and dementia was attenuated from HR 
1.51 (1.03-2.22) to HR 1.30 (0.86-1.97) after adjusting for other risk factors for dementia including education, 
smoking status, alcohol consumption, physical activity and hypertension.(121)  
Mild TBI and dementia 
Concussion and mild TBI (mTBI) are often used interchangeably.(122)  There remain relatively few studies of 
mTBI and dementia risk, and methodological issues include inconsistent definitions. A previous cohort study 
using a national patient register found increased risk, even with a single mTBI (OR 1.63; 1.57–1.70).(123) Since 
our last commission, a cohort study found no increased risk from mTBI over 15 years229 but a systematic review 
and meta-analysis of 3,149,740 people reported a history of mTBI, fulfilling world Health organisation criteria,  
increased risk of AD (RR 1.18, 1.11-1.25) and a sensitivity analysis including the many fewer studies in which 
mTBI preceded AD by > 10 years also found higher risk, although with wider confidence intervals (RR 2.02, 0.66-
6.21, n=2,307). (124)   
TBI and sport 
Some sports (e.g., rugby, American football, ice hockey) involve frequent head contact and whiplash events are 
associated with greater risk of repeated TBI than sports where low frequency individual TBI may occur in 
accidents or as part of the sport (e.g., cycling, horse-riding, boxing). There is increasing concern that professional 
and amateur soccer and rugby players live with and die more from neurodegenerative illnesses than the general 
population, which may be related to occasional severe TBI or frequent mTBI from physical contact with others or 
heading a football.(125) A meta-analysis which ranked concussion risk in contact sports, found 83 studies of 
reported concussion rates, mainly from the US (n=66) with 5 each from Canada and the UK.(126) Rugby had the 
highest concussion rate (28.3 concussions per 10,000 games; followed by American Football (8.7) ice hockey 

19 

(7.9), and wrestling (5.0). College sport had slightly higher concussion rates than high school sport; 3.8 
concussions vs 3.7 per 10,000 games. 

There is evidence that people who play professional soccer for longer and in positions where they head the ball 
more often and are more likely to incur head injuries are at higher risk of dementia. One small study (60 players) 
found cognitive ability in former professional soccer players was inversely associated with estimated heading 
frequency. (127) A large study from Scotland found 5.0% of 7676 former soccer players compared to 1.6% of 
23,028 individuals matched on age, sex, and area socioeconomic status developed a neurodegenerative disease 
(HR, 3.66; 2.88-4.65).(128) This elevated risk was highest for defenders who have a greater frequency of headers 
and lowest for goalkeepers, and higher for those who had played professionally for >15 years. A study of French 
professional footballers found all-cause mortality lower than that of the national population (SMR 0.69, 0.64–
0.75) but an excess of deaths with dementia (SMR 3.38, 2.49–4.50).  (129, 130)  A cohort study of 6007 male 
football players (but not goalkeepers) from Sweden’s top division and controls matched for sex, area and region 
reported that football players had a higher risk of all-cause dementia (HR 1·62, 1·47–1·78) but not motor neuron 
or Parkinson’s disease. (131) Risk of all-cause mortality (HR 0·95 0·91–0·99), was lower among football players 
than controls. Similarly, all-cause mortality was lower among former national team rugby players until 70 years 
of age but over a median of 32 years, 47 (11.4%) former rugby players and 67 (5.4%) controls were diagnosed 
with neurodegenerative disease (HR 2.67, 1.67-4.27).(129) 

Mechanisms 
TBI can cause or exacerbate dementia through direct trauma.(132) Plausible pathological mechanisms for longer 
term neurodegeneration following TBI include axonal injury promoting early generation of proteinopathies 
(hyperphosphorylated tau and amyloid B), microglial activation and cortical atrophy. (133, 134)  We identified 3 
cohort studies which assessed brain pathology in those with a history of TBI and loss of consciousness, with no 
consistency between studies for the association with neuropathologies. A study of 1589 people who had an 
autopsy found an increase in Lewy body pathology and hippocampal sclerosis but not plaques or tangles in 
those who had TBI with loss of consciousness. (135) An ADNI study of 241 participants, 41 of whom reported 
previous TBI, found a history of TBI was associated with increased B amyloid deposition, cortical thinning and 
onset of cognitive impairment 3-4 year earlier. (136) In contrast, a UK population study of 80 participants who 
had TBI with loss of consciousness before age 60, found no difference in amyloid deposition, hippocampal 
volume or cortical thickness but lower cognition and smaller brain volume at age around 70 than their 42 
counterparts without injury.(137) Ongoing work using neuroimaging and fluid biomarkers of neurodegeneration 
may help identify both overlapping and distinct patterns of neuropathology in different subtypes of post-
traumatic dementia or other neurodegenerative disorders, including chronic traumatic encephalopathy. (134, 
138) 

Overall, the evidence suggests that TBI increases dementia risk, possibly leading to earlier onset of dementia by 
2-3 years, (139) which may be due to accumulation of underlying neuropathology. This risk of 
neurodegenerative disease should not obscure the message that sport is generally good for health.  Protection 
from head injury, for example, by appropriate head protection equipment, limiting heading practice and high-
impact collisions, preventing playing immediately after TBI and possibly adaptation of the rules, should now be 
an individual and public health priority.  Some sports bodies and government bodies have begun to implement 
this policy. 
Smoking 
We previously reported that late-life smoking is associated with an increased risk of dementia (HR 1.6, 1.2-
2.2).(2) new evidence shows that midlife smoking (compared to late-life) appears to be a stronger dementia risk 

20 

factor in more recent studies possibly because of improvements in treating cardiovascular disease and smoking-
related cancers, so smokers now have an increased chance of living long enough to develop dementia. A large 
meta-analysis reported midlife smoking increased dementia risk (RR 1.30 118-1.45, 37 studies) but there was no 
increased risk in former smokers. (140)  Long-term cohort studies, including the Framingham Heart Study (21-
year follow-up which found strongest risk in those who were smokers starting in early adult life ),(141) the 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC, 25-year follow-up, n= 15,744  HR 1.41, 1.23-1.61),(142) and the 
Whitehall II study (32-year follow-up,  HR 1.36,  1.10-1.68),(143) have reported similar excess risks of dementia 
in midlife current smokers. A UKB study of 497,401 adults reported a HR 1.7 (1.2–2.5) for smokers aged <50 
years at baseline.(144)  In the Danish general population a pooled analysis of two prospective cohorts of 61,664 
individuals, reported that risk of dementia for smokers in midlife were increased for men (HR 3.2, 1.4–7.4) and 
women (HR 1.7,  1.1–2.8).(145)  

The effect of stopping smoking  
A 32-year follow-up of the Whitehall II cohort, controlling for socioeconomic status, found that smokers (HR 
1.36,1.10-1.68) but not ex-smokers (HR 0.95, 0.79-1.14) have an increased risk of dementia compared to those 
who have never smoked, and that socioeconomic inequalities in dementia risk were partially mediated by 
smoking. (143)   The meta-analysis above also showed no increased risk in former smokers. Similarly, a Korean 
nationwide study of 789,532 participants who were assessed for smoking status over 2 years reported that ex- 
smokers had a lower risk of all cause dementia HR 0.92 (0.87-0.97) compared with continuing smokers and this 
was more pronounced  among adults who smoked before age 65 (HR 0.8, 0.7–0.9) than those aged 65 years or 
older (HR 1.0, 0.9–1.0).(146) Another Korean population study examining dementia risk in people with atrial 
fibrillation, also found a reduced risk of dementia in those who quit smoking compared to current smokers (HR 
0.83,  0.72-0.95).(147) These studies suggest that smoking cessation reduces dementia risk compared to 
continued smoking. Smoking should now be considered a midlife risk factor (in the 2020 commission it was 
considered as a late life risk factor) and the effect of stopping smoking is encouraging.   

Cardiovascular risk factors  
We have chosen to consider risk factors individually rather than overall cardiovascular morbidity. Vascular 
dementia usually occurs when people have a stroke (and is part of the diagnostic criteria) and happens more 
often in people who smoke or who have diabetes and hypertension. (28) Stroke and dementia share risk factors 
of less education, lack of exercise, hypertension, heart disease and less social contact (148) but some people 
with these risk factors will not develop dementia despite neuropathology, sometimes because they die 
younger.(23)   

Several studies have examined a combination of cardiovascular risk factors. The Life’s Simple 7 group defined 
ideal cardiovascular health factors (BMI, diet, smoking, physical activity, blood pressure, cholesterol and glucose 
levels), and better scores on this index are associated with lower dementia risk. (28) (149) Similarly, in China, a 
10-year longitudinal study of 29,072 people with mean age 72, found that having four or more of six factors: a 
healthy diet (eating at least 7 of 12 eligible food items), physical exercise (≥150 min of moderate intensity or ≥75 
min of vigorous intensity weekly), active social contact (≥ 2 per week), active cognitive activity (≥ 2 per week), 
never or former smoking, and never drinking alcohol was associated with slower memory decline in those with 
fewer protective cardiovascular risk factors.  (150)  This applied to both APOEε4 carriers and non-carriers.  

Cholesterol: Low Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (LDL- C) 
The evidence available at the time of previous commission reports on higher levels of low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (LDL-C) was a possible dementia risk factor was inconclusive. Meta-analytic evidence found 

21 

inconsistent evidence from HICs that high LDL-C in midlife, but not in later life, might be a risk factor for 
cognitive decline, all cause dementia and AD.(151) (152)  

 A newer meta-analysis of LDL-C in adults aged <65 years followed up for > 12 months, found 3 cohort studies 
with 1,138,488 participants, all from UK, and reported each 1mmol/l increase in LDL-C was associated with 8% 
increased incidence of all cause dementia (1.08; 1.03 - 1.14; I2 = 0.3%). (153)  A study of 1,189,090 participants 
found high LDL (>3mmol/l) was associated with an increased risk of dementia, HR 1.33, 1.26-1.41.(47) Higher 
baseline LDL-C in a large cohort from UK general practice cohort (n=1,853,954) followed up for a median of 7.4 
years, was similarly associated with higher risk of all cause dementia (RR 1.05, 1.03–1.06 per SD increase in LDL-
C, 1.01 mmol/L or 39 mg/dL increase). (154) This risk was greater in midlife, people aged <65 with high LDL-C 
had increased risk for dementia diagnosed within 10 years (RR 1·10, 1·04–1·15) and over 10 years after baseline 
(RR 1·17, 1·08–1·27).  High LDL-C is sometimes associated with diet and in a Danish cohort study of 94,184 
people followed from a mean age of 58 years, those who did not adhere to dietary guidelines  (≥ 3 weekly 
servings of all of fruit,  vegetables and fish, rarely drink sugar sweetened drinks, eat prepared meat like sausages 
or have takeaways) were more likely to have high levels of LDL-C. (155) After a median follow-up of 10 years, 
those with low adherence were more likely to develop non-AD dementia compared to high adherence (low 
adherence HR 1.54, 1.18–2.00), but not AD dementia although subtyping may not be accurate. There was no 
increased risk of dementia in people who took lipid lowering drugs. A US study of 4392 people found that higher 
high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C) protected against the development of dementia.(156)   

Further evidence of causality comes from a MR meta-analysis which included 27 studies with 3136 people with 
dementia and 3103 healthy controls, which reported that high total cholesterol and low HDL-Cl were risk factors 
for dementia. (157) In contrast, an individual participant meta-analysis at baseline older age (>21,000 people, 
mean baseline age 76 years) found no association between total LDL or HDL-C and cognitive decline; this did not 
change if analysis was stratified by statin use or APOEε4 status.(158)   

Mechanisms  
Excess brain cholesterol is associated with increased stroke risk and higher deposition of brain amyloid and tau. 
(153) HDL reduces cholesterol (159) and lowering cholesterol decreases Aβ levels.(152)   

Interventions for high cholesterol 
Individual counselling about diet and exercise has a small effect in reducing LDL-C.(160) Cholesterol-lowering 
statins have become a focus of research in AD and have potential benefit as they are anti-inflammatory and 
antioxidant as well as reducing cholesterol.(161) A meta-analysis of 36 cohort studies found statin use was 
associated with a reduced risk of all-cause dementia compared to untreated high cholesterol (OR 0.80, 0.75-
0.86, I2 =97.5) and AD (OR 0.68, 0.56-0.81 I2 =94.5) with no difference between men and women. (162) A 
Cochrane review of RCTs of statins given in late life found only one study and no effect on dementia risk and two 
studies of cognitive outcome with no effect.(163) Repeat observational data can be used to emulate a target 
trial of statin use. Using data from 6373 participants aged 55-80 years an emulated trial found sustained statin 
use, but not statin initiation alone, to be associated with reduced 10-year risk of dementia or death.(164)    

Decision 
Overall, there is high quality consistent, biologically plausible, evidence that high LDL cholesterol in midlife is a 
risk factor for dementia. Earlier World Health Organisation guidelines suggested management of dyslipidaemias 
in mid-life may be offered to reduce the risk of cognitive decline and dementia but thought the evidence quality 
was low.(116) Although there are not long term high quality RCTs of statins to prevent dementia , these would 
be unethical and impractical. Meta-analyses observational studies are heterogenous but show benefit, possibly 

22 

because the benefit depends on age of initiation.  Statins may mitigate this excess risk, but this is less clear in 
late life.   

Physical inactivity, exercise, and fitness 
We previously concluded that the balance of evidence is that the link between exercise and dementia is likely to 
be bidirectional.(2)   Physical activity changes over a person’s lifetime, decreasing when someone becomes ill 
and varies across cultures, socioeconomic status, and between sexes and can be at different levels of intensity 
making  it complex to study. Since the 2020 commission, A systematic review and meta-analysis of 58 studies 
exploring the link between physical activity and dementia, found that physical activity was associated with a 
decreased risk of all-cause dementia (RR 0.80, 0.77 to 0.84, n=257,983) and dementia types in short and longer 
follow-ups ≥20 years, and at all ages. (165)  A range of intensities of exercise were included in the meta-analysis. 
Reduction in risk was greatest when moving from extreme sedentariness to some physical activity .a cohort 
study (n=1,417) which recorded physical activity five times between age 36 and 69, found that being physically 
active at all ages was associated with better cognition at age 69; with the strongest association for sustained 
physical activity.(166) A prospective study of 29,826 people followed up for a median of 24.5 years, and 
assessed twice for weekly physical activity 10 years apart, found those who maintained an individually estimated 
optimal level of physical activity had a reduced risk of dementia compared to persistently inactive individuals 
(HR 0.75, 0.58-0.97 as did those who  increased their physical activity to an optimal level (HR 0.83, 0.72-
0.96).(167) A longitudinal study of 1718 women over a median time of 11.9 years, found more physical activity 
was associated with less cognitive decline but not when this was adjusted for diabetes and hypertension.(168) 

Physical activity interventions 
An RCT of 945 participants, mean age 78 years and 48% women, were randomised 2:1:1 to a 5-year control 
group, moderate-intensity continuous training or high-intensity interval training twice weekly.(169)  At 5 years, 
96% of the control group adhered to national guidance for physical activity, and 75% and 76% adhered to the 
interval training intervention. There was no significant difference in cognition between the groups (beta 0.26, 
−0.17 - 0.69) or odds of MCI (OR 0.86, 0.66-1.13). Men in the exercise group had a decreased risk of MCI (OR 
0.65, 0.47-0.99) and slightly higher cognitive scores than controls. Those who decreased peak oxygen uptake, 
compared to maintaining or increasing it had higher odds of MCI (1.35, 0.98-1.87) compared to the control 
group although this was imprecisely estimated. Findings are in line with the small cognitive benefit shown in an 
umbrella review of RCTs on the effects of physical exercise on cognition.(170)  Outcomes may depend on not 
only the duration but type and intensity of physical activity. At the policy-level, urban design interventions and 
provision of high-quality green spaces are recommended by the WHO to reduce physical inactivity across the 
population.(171) 

Mechanisms 
Exercise at any age appeared helpful for cognition, possibly through changes in blood flow and function from 
reduced hypertension and increased nitric oxide culminating in enhanced brain plasticity and reduced 
neuroinflammation. (172)  People who engage in moderate to vigorous exercise on more days have relatively 
larger brain volumes than those who do less or no exercise. (173) (174) There is also evidence from mouse 
models that irisin, a myokine released during exercise, may be neuroprotective.(175) 

Diabetes  
We previously discussed type 2 diabetes as a risk factor for development of late-life dementia. New evidence 
suggests that age of onset makes a difference with midlife, but not necessarily late-life diabetes onset increasing 
the risk of dementia. In a prospective cohort study of 10,095 participants, the risk for dementia increased for 
every 5-year earlier age of type 2 diabetes onset (HR 1.24, 1.06-1.46) until  aged over 70 years at onset).(29)   It 

23 

 
 
 
now seems that diabetes should be classified as a midlife risk for dementia. It is unclear whether diabetes is no 
longer a risk factor for dementia at older ages or the lack of demonstrated significant risk is because of shorter 
follow-up and there are few studies. The WHO concludes that late life diabetes may have a detrimental effect on 
brain health and dementia risk. (116) Longer illness duration and poorly controlled diabetes increases the risk of 
dementia. 

Mechanism 
Our understanding of the mechanism is incomplete. Long-term micro- and macro-vascular complications are 
well-established in diabetes, and it is likely that causal mechanism incorporates a strong vascular component, 
including stroke risk. (176)  Peripheral insulin resistance leads to decrease insulin signalling in the central 
nervous system, followed by alteration in brain metabolism. Insulin resistance is a common molecular 
mechanism linking diabetes and AD; it leads to increased Aβ toxicity, Tau hyperphosphorylation, oxidative stress 
and neuroinflammation. (177) Elevated systemic inflammatory markers (such as CRP) were associated with the 
diabetes-associated increased dementia risk. (29)  

Interventions for diabetes 
It is unclear if effective treatment of diabetes ameliorates dementia risk, particularly as taking more oral 
medication and insulin is related to having more severe diabetes. Strict, intensive compared to standard diabetic 
control, however, does not decrease the risk of dementia.(2)  Some evidence suggests that those taking certain 
types of anti-diabetic medication may be less at risk of dementia. A systematic review meta-analysis and 
network analysis of 27 studies (1,590,757 patients) which did not report heterogeneity  found cohort studies 
indicated that Sodium-glucose Cotransporter-2(SGLT-2) inhibitors(OR 0.41, 0.22–0.76),glucagon-like peptide 1 
receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) (OR 0.34, 0.14–0.85]) and  dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP)-4  (OR 0.78 [0.61–0.99]) 
were associated with dementia risk reduction while sulfonylureas (OR 1.43, 1.11–1.82])  were found to be 
associated with increased risk.(178)   Metformin was not associated with a decreased or increased risk (OR  0.71; 
0.46–1.08).  A study in UK primary care found that 114,628 people with diabetes initiating  metformin 
compared to 95,609 on no medication for their diabetes had a significantly lower risk of dementia  HR 0.88 
(0.84-0.92) (179) Another meta-analysis of 819,511 people with type 2 diabetes and a mean follow up of 4.5 
years had similar findings with  less subsequent dementia  in users of three classes of drugs but reported high 
heterogeneity; SLGT-2 - (3 studies, RR, 0.62; 0.39–0.97, I2 82.5%) ; GLP-1RA (4 studies, RR 0.72; 0.54–0.97 I2 91.3 
%)  and DPP-4 inhibitors (RR 0.84; 0.74–0.94; I2 88.6%).  (180)  People with diabetes may not be taking 
medication because their diabetes is well controlled without medication or because it is not well treated which 
may account for the heterogeneity between studies.   There is also RCT evidence for the protective effect of 
GLP-1 RAs. (181) In a Taiwanese population of 31,384 propensity-matched pairs (including matching for chronic 
kidney disease with diabetes) followed for five years, those who were adherent to metformin had a 72% lower 
risk of developing dementia. (182) I  Novel study designs like MR or target trial emulation might help address 
potential confounding by indication, where high blood sugar leads to particular prescriptions or harms those 
who do not take medication. (183)  

Weight loss might also help diabetes control and therefore cognition. One RCT recruited  3,751 people aged 45 
to 76 with type 2 diabetes mellitus, who were overweight or obese,  to a 10 year increased exercise and 
decreased calorie intake intervention versus diabetes support and education  (the look AHEAD study).(184) This 
study was terminated as in the interim analysis it had no effect on death from vascular outcomes or myocardial 
infarction, stroke or severe angina..  Cognitive outcome was measured at follow up controlling for baseline 
education but not cognition. There was a strong inverse relationship between HbA1c concentration and 

24 

cognition over both groups. Cognitive function was not related to group allocation or to weight loss. Overall 
tighter control of diabetes, but not very low blood sugar, or weight loss without improved diabetic control may 
attenuate the risk and be a way of decreasing dementia. 

Hypertension and its trajectory 
Our commission has previously discussed the evidence that midlife hypertension increases the risk for all-cause 
dementia, AD and vascular dementia, but that nearer the time of dementia people’s BP tends to fall.(2) Blood 
pressure across the lifecourse rises in western societies, with evidence of rises associated with socioeconomic 
circumstance. A systematic review of longitudinal studies estimated that BP first rises then starts to decrease 5 
years prior to dementia diagnosis while weight falls around 10 years before diagnosis.(185)  However,  an 
individual participant data (IPD) meta-analysis finds that high blood pressure may continue to  be a risk in older 
age(186) but some people who are developing dementia have a lower blood pressure and therefore the picture 
is mixed.  These meta-analyses do not cover blood pressure variability  but a cohort study (n=2234, ≥ 65 years) 
measured blood pressure variability, with assessments over 3, 6, 9 and 12 years, and found that higher systolic 
variability increased the risk of dementia with HRs ranging from 1.02 (1.01-1.04) to 1.10 (1.05-1.16). (187) 

African Americans have higher recorded BP than other US groups and this may be a contributor to a higher risk 
of dementia than in White Americans. This is considered in an IPD meta-analysis of five cohort studies of 19,378 
people with mean age 59.8, where black African Americans had significantly faster global cognition decline but 
there was no significant difference after adjustment for cumulative mean systolic BP. (188) 

Interventions for high blood pressure 
There are three meta-analyses of antihypertensive medication RCTs. Two found they were protective(189) (12) 
against cognitive impairment and dementia and one with short (1 year) follow-up did not.(190)  The meta-
analysis of 12 RCTs (n=96,158) with a mean follow-up of 4.1 years found a lower risk of dementia or cognitive 
impairment compared with controls (OR 0.93, 0.88-0.98) and of cognitive impairment alone (OR 0.93, 0.88-
0.99). (189) The second study used IPD from 5 RCTs (n=28,008) with placebo controls, three of which were in the 
first study, and found a lower risk of dementia in the treatment group (OR 0.87, 0.75-0.99). (12) A Cochrane 
review with three studies overlapping with the previous study, included 12 RCTs (8 placebo controlled, 
n=30,412) with interventions lasting at least 12 months. It concluded that there was a modest benefit on 
cognitive change measured with MMSE (5 studies, MD  0.20 (0.10-0.29) but duration was too short to show a 
difference in dementia incidence (4 studies; OR 0.89, 0.72-1.09).(190)  An IPD meta-analysis of 17 studies 
including people in LMICs and HICs (mean age72.5, follow-up 4.3 years) found that that those with untreated 
hypertension had a 42% higher risk of dementia than healthy controls (HR 1.42; 1.15-1.76), but this risk was 
attenuated or lost with treatment (HR 1.13; 0.99-1.28 vs. healthy controls). (186)  One meta-analysis of IPD 
cohorts comprising 31,090 dementia free adults at baseline with follow-up of ≥ 5 years found those with 
hypertension taking any antihypertensive were at lower risk than those not (HR 0.88 0.79-0.98) but no 
difference between classes of drugs. (191)While there is a lack of direct comparison of the effect of different 
antihypertensives, a network analysis and systematic review found  that treatment with angiotensin receptor 11 
blockers and calcium channel blockers (CCBs), were associated with lower dementia risk after 7 and 10 years 
compared with other antihypertensives.(192) MR findings of high BP being protective (193-196) are inconsistent 
with RCTs findings and MR studies’ findings are likely to be influenced by survival bias. (12, 189, 197) 

Obesity and weight 
We previously discussed that obesity in midlife is a risk factor for dementia.(2) A further systematic review and 
meta-analyses examining the relationship between obesity and dementia included 14 studies with 77,890 

25 

participants, and found that midlife obesity was associated with subsequent all cause dementia (RR 1.31, 1.02-
1.68).(198) Another study on central obesity, measured through waist circumference or waist to hip ratio, 
included 5,060,687 participants from 16 studies, and showed that higher versus lower waist circumference was 
associated with a greater risk of cognitive impairment and dementia (HR 1.10, 1.05-1.15) and the risk was 
greater in those aged >65 years.(199) Obesity is more common in those who exercise less and is associated with 
diabetes and hypertension which also cause cardiovascular disease,(200) so it is possible that this association is 
mediated by other risk factors for dementia. Nonetheless, most studies in these meta-analyses adjusted for 
health conditions such as hypertension, stroke, blood lipid levels and diabetes, as well as demographic 
characteristics so this should have minimised the effect of these intermediaries.  

Interventions for excess weight 
A meta-analysis of interventional studies for weight loss identified 13 longitudinal studies (total of 551 
participants) and 7 RCTs (total of 468 participants) of overweight and obese participants. Intentional modest 
weight loss of even 2 kg amongst trial participants was associated with improvements in cognition at median 
follow-up of 6 months, (201) indicating that health behaviours could have a beneficial effect even if weight loss 
is not sufficient to alter obesity status. These improvements were more pronounced in people who changed 
their diet or who exercised to lose weight, than in those who had bariatric surgery. The average weight loss from 
non-surgical interventions is around 2kg.(202)  

An additional suggested mechanism is stigma in people with higher Body Mass Index (BMI), which is associated 
with higher cortisol levels, inflammation and negative health consequences and may contribute to the 
association with dementia.(203) Further work is needed to understand mechanisms by which excess adiposity 
contributes to dementia risk.  

Being underweight 
A systematic review of 19 prospective studies where data were pooled, also found an increased risk of dementia 
in underweight individuals (BMI <18.5; HR: 1.26, 1.20-1.31).(204)   An IPD meta-analysis of 1.3 million people 
from 39 prospective cohort studies found that obesity was a risk factor for dementia in cohorts where baseline 
was >15 years before but appeared protective if <10 before dementia. 193 Their interpretation was that increased 
risk in the weight loss group was due to reverse causation, as people often lose weight before they develop 
dementia. Being underweight is also potentially linked with malnutrition, although it can occur for many 
reasons. 

Excessive alcohol consumption 
In the previous Lancet Commission, we found that drinking >21 UK units (14 US drinks, 168g) of ethanol weekly 
in midlife compared with lighter drinking  (<14 units) was associated with an increased risk of dementia (RR 1.18, 
1.06-1.31).(2)  Similarly, a subsequent individual participant meta-analysis of 131,415 participants from France, 
UK, Sweden and Finland found, after adjusting for confounders, heavier drinking  ( > 21 units/week) in midlife, 
compared to lighter drinking, was associated with an increased risk of dementia (HR 1.22, 1.01-1.48).(205)  In 
line with this a review of 28 systematic reviews concluded that heavy alcohol use was associated with increased 
risk of all-cause dementia and reduced grey matter volume in imaging studies. (206) Alcohol-induced loss of 
consciousness increased dementia risk in those with either moderate or heavy consumption. (205)   

Non-drinkers 
Some cross-sectional studies of older adults have found a similar dementia risk in heavy alcohol drinkers and 
non-drinkers but some people who are counted as non-drinkers were previously heavy drinkers. (207)  A 

26 

 
 
Japanese prospective study following 42,870 participants for 14.9 years, found both non-drinking and drinking 
>450 g alcohol/week from midlife compared to light drinking, were associated with increased risk of dementia 
(HR 1.29, 1.12-1.47,  HR 1.34, 1.12-1.60  respectively).(208)  An IPD meta-analysis of 24,478 older adults  from 15 
prospective cohort studies reported that during 151, 636 person years of follow-up, dementia risk was lower in 
occasional (HR 0.78, 0.68-0.89), light-moderate (1.3–24.9 g/day; HR =0.78, 0.7-0.87), and moderate-heavy 
drinkers (25–44.9 g/day; HR 0.62, 0.51-0.77) than non-drinkers but not in heavy drinkers (> 45g/day). (209) MR 
also finds a causal relationship between alcohol consumption and earlier age of onset of AD, and suggests that 
any relationship between not drinking and AD is due to survivor bias.(210)   Observational studies  usually find a 
j-shaped dose-response, such that non-drinking is associated with increasing dementia risk compared to light 
drinking. This is probably because many non-drinkers have previously had high alcohol consumption or other 
illnesses which prevent them drinking and studies which correct for this find there is no excess mortality in the 
non- drinking group. (207, 211)  

Reduction of excessive alcohol consumption  
A study of a nationwide South Korean cohort of 3,933,382 participants that serially assessed alcohol 
consumption over 3 years, found sustained heavy drinkers (≥30grams or 3 units/day) had an increased risk of all-
cause dementia (HR 1.08, 1.03-1.10), and reducing drinking from heavy to moderate levels (15.0-29.9g/day) 
reduced the risk of all cause dementia (HR 0.92, 0.86-0.99) compared to sustained abstinence. (212)  Sustained 
mild (<15 g/day) or moderate alcohol consumption, or initiating mild alcohol consumption versus sustained non-
drinkers, was also associated with lower risk of all cause dementia (HR 0.79 0.77-0.8; HR 0.83, 0.79-0.88; HR 
0.93, 0.9-0.96 respectively) but as above, some non-drinkers may have been former heavy drinkers.  Overall, 
reduction of excessive alcohol or sustained light drinking is associated with a lower dementia risk than excessive 
alcohol. There is a lack of clear evidence that not drinking alcohol increases the risk of dementia. The 
observational evidence of excess risk for non-drinkers may be due to people who have previously drunk large 
amounts, abstained at the time when data was gathered (and been classified as non-drinkers) and then may 
return to drinking.   

Social isolation 
We have previously discussed social isolation or lack of social contact as a risk factor for dementia.(2)  Since 
then, two systematic reviews found less frequent social contact was associated with higher risk of dementia. The 
first, which included eight studies with a total of 15,762 participants, reported higher dementia risk (RR 1.57, 
1.32-1.85) for those with less compared to more frequent social contact,(213) while the second (with one 
overlapping paper) reported a smaller increased risk (RR 1.18, 1.08-1.30). (214)  Duration of follow-up may 
partly explain inconsistent results from these studies; seven of the eight studies in one of the reviews had less 
than 4 years’ follow-up making reverse causation likely. (213)  However, two subsequent studies of participants 
in UKB, with 9 (215) and 12(216) years mean follow-up, found that dementia risk was higher in those who were 
more socially isolated at baseline.  

Loneliness is linked to, but differs from, social isolation as it is about people’s feelings that their social contact is 
inadequate. (217) Loneliness was also associated with elevated dementia risk in three reviews comprising 3-8 
studies (RR 1.26, 1.14-1.40; 1.38, 0.98–1.94 and 1.58, 1.19-2.09 respectively).  (213) Elevated dementia risk of 
34-91% was reported in subsequent studies, in the US over 10 years, in Netherlands and Sweden over 14 years 
and in Japan over 5 years. (218-222) Some, but not all, of these studies found the association persisted after 
adjustment for potential confounders, including lack of social contact. These results are summarised in figure 7. 

27 

Participation in social activities is also linked, but distinct, from social isolation and has been linked with lower 
dementia risk. Two studies with serial social activity measurement found that declining social activity 
participation was associated with higher dementia risk in the short term but not but with a longer follow-up.  
(223, 224) This suggests that the link with participation may be at least partly due to reverse causation whereby 
decline occurs during the preclinical phase of dementia. 

 (216)

Figure 7 Different aspects of social participation and risk of dementia.  With permission(217) 

Mechanisms 
Social contact in any form has a potentially beneficial effect on dementia risk by building cognitive reserve, 
promoting healthy behaviours, and reducing stress and inflammation. (217)  Risk has been reported to be 
consistent across individuals with different polygenic risk scores (215) and social isolation linked to lower grey 
matter volume in the temporal, frontal, and other brain regions.(217) 

Interventions to increase social contact and activity participation. 
Interventions to increase social contact and participation in activities through facilitator-led group activities have 
yielded inconsistent results on general cognitive function. One Finnish RCT of a three-month intervention with a 
primary outcome of cognition recruited 235 people who were lonely aged ≥75 and showed a small, significant 
improvement on ADAS-cog performance (mean difference in change -2.6 /100 points)(225)  but studies from the 
US (226) and China(227) did not find that facilitator-led group activities were beneficial. Studies of multidomain 
interventions which included group components suggested small cognitive benefits (Cohen’s d = 0.13 (228) and 
mean mini-mental state examination (MMSE) difference 0.99 points) for highly intensive interventions. A 
subsequent pilot RCT of a multidomain intervention, including social activities through group meetings and 
additional scheduled monthly social activities, led to general cognitive improvement at 24 weeks despite small 
numbers (Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status score between group difference 
6.2 points (p=0.004). (229) The contribution of the social component of multidomain intervention is unclear. 
Existing studies are too small and follow-up too short to identify if they have any effect on dementia incidence.   

28 

 
 
Air pollution 
Exposure to particulates in domestic and external environments is now of intense concern and interest. 
Exposure is lifelong and a potential contributor to many long-term conditions across the lifecourse. In the 2020 
commission, we found agreement that fine particulate matter air pollution, PM2.5 (diameter ≤ 2.5µm) and PM10 
(diameter ≤ 10µm) were risk factors for dementia and cognitive impairment, despite substantial heterogeneity 
across studies in durations of exposure, covariates in the analysis, outcomes, and variable risk of bias.(2)  
Continuing research interest on this is reflected by the publication of at least nine further systematic reviews 
and meta-analyses since 2019, which have all reported that air pollution is associated with increased dementia 
risk. To manage study heterogeneity, some meta-analyses have narrowed inclusion criteria, e.g., one review 
analysed only studies providing hazard ratios (HR), comprising 20 studies involving 91,391,296 people, and 
reported a pooled higher dementia risk of 3% per 1 μg/m3 increment in PM2.5 (HR 1.03, 1.02–1.05).(230) A 
conservative pooled estimate, obtained from a meta-analysis of five studies that used active case ascertainment 
of high quality studies, reported a 17% increase in dementia risk per 2 µg/m3 increment in PM2.5, although 
confidence intervals were wide and included the null (HR 1.17, 0.96- 1.43).(231) Pooled HRs were reported from 
five studies each of nitrogen dioxide (HR per 10μg/m3 1.0,; 0.98 - 1.06) and nitrogen oxides (HR per 10 μg/m3 
1.05, 0.98 - 1.13), and four of ozone (HR per 5 μg/m3 1.00, 0.98 -1.05), none of which were statistically 
significant. Other pollutants had been studied by too few studies for meta-analysis.(231) 

In both HICs and LMICs, where air pollution levels are often high and increasing, PM2.5 and PM10 levels have also 
been associated with dementia, MCI, and AD.(232-235) There may be distinct or synergistic risks from ambient 
(outdoor) and household (indoor) air pollution. Studies in LMICs have demonstrated that solid fuel use, a proxy 
for household (indoor) air pollution, is associated with higher dementia risk and accelerated cognitive decline 
among middle-aged and older adults.(236, 237)  Residential wood and coal burning stoves can also be a source 
of indoor air pollution, and are reported to currently contribute 38% of the UK’s PM2.5 emissions and associated 
health risks.(238)  

A US 7-year cohort study of >18 million participants found that the PM2.5 constituent with the strongest 
association with dementia risk was black carbon (HR per 1μg/m3 increment 1.12; 1.11, 1.14).(239)  The studies 
have mainly been in older adults at baseline but does not rule out an effect earlier in life.  

Mechanism of air pollution’s effect on dementia 
A longitudinal study with a mean follow-up of 6 years of 2,927 Swedish residents (63% women, free from 
dementia at baseline, baseline mean age 74) considered PM2.5 and NOx yearly from 1990, to examine if CVD 
(atrial fibrillation, ischemic heart disease, heart failure, and stroke) modified or mediated the association 
between pollution and dementia and found it did.(240) The effect of air pollution is worst among people with 
these pre-existing conditions. 

The effects of changing air pollution 
There is emerging evidence on the potential effects of improved air quality on cognitive decline and dementia 
incidence. A French cohort study with 12-years’ follow-up, reported a reduction in PM2.5 between 1990-2000 
was associated with a lower risk of dementia (HR, 0.85; 0.76 -0.95 for median PM2.5 reduction of 12.2 
μg/m3).(241)  Older US women living in an area with improved air quality (PM2.5 and NO2 reduced over ten years) 
had a lower risk of dementia.(242) In a quasi-experimental study, the China's Clean Air Act mitigated cognitive 
decline in older adults, indicating that strict clean air policies may reduce the risk of cognitive ageing measured 
by mini-mental state examination associated with air pollution.(243) A north-south difference in China's central 

29 

heating policies led to differences in air pollution concentrations; higher air pollution (PM10, NO2, SO2, CO, O3)  
was associated with a 42.4% higher dementia risk.(244)  

As the evidence base grows, it would be valuable to standardize study design, reporting and analyses to allow 
comparisons, and achieve a more granular understanding of the association between air pollution and 
dementia.(245) Given the close link between socioeconomic circumstances, household conditions and exposure 
to air pollution, minimising residual confounding in these studies is difficult.  

Overall, there is much stronger support for the implementation of World Health Organization global air quality 
guidelines that ultimately aim for average annual PM2.5 concentrations of less than 5 µg/m3.(246, 247) It is 
unclear if there is any ‘safe’ level of air pollution, as each 1 μg/m3 unit increment in PM2.5 is associated with 
higher dementia risk, and the lowest annual PM2.5 concentration in global mega-cities was reported to be 6.7 
µg/m3 in Miami, whilst the top five most polluted cities had an annual average concentration of PM2.5 greater 
than 89 μg/m3.(248) There is little known about risk in relation to dementia subtypes, and whether individual 
PM constituents are important  (e.g., black carbon, sulphates, nitrates and ammonium).  

Uncorrected visual impairment 
The global prevalence of avoidable vision impairment and blindness, including uncorrected refractive error and 
cataracts, in adults aged ≥50 years is has been estimated to be 12.6%, with prevalence much higher in LMICs 
than in HICs.(249) (249) This is distinct from cortical blindness seen in posterior cortical atrophy, usually due to 
AD, but often initially misdiagnosed as ocular disease.(250) 

Visual impairment, cataract, diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma and macular degeneration and dementia risk  
Our commission has not previously considered vision impairment as a risk factor for dementia but there is now 
considerable new evidence. This includes a meta-analysis of 14 prospective cohort studies, with follow-up 
between 3.7 to 14.5 years, including 6,204,827 older adults who were cognitively intact at baseline, of whom 
171,888 developed dementia. (251)  Vision impairment was associated with a pooled RR for dementia of 1.47 
(1.36 -1.60 see figure 8). In an accompanying meta-analysis of 12 prospective cohort studies with 45,313 
participants, 13,350 of whom developed cognitive impairment, the RR for vision impairment was 1.35 (1.28 -
1.41).  

Figure 8 

Meta-analysis of risk ratios of at least visual impairment compared to no visual impairment on incident all-cause 
dementia. CI, confidence interval. With permission (252) 

30 

 
 
 
A second meta-analyses found increased risk of all-cause dementia (RR 1.38, 1.19–1.59, n=37705) with visual 
impairment.(252) Breaking this down into different eye conditions, there was increased dementia risk 
associated with cataracts (3 studies, 6,659 participants, 1,312 cases, (HR 1.17, 1.00–1.38, I2 = 0.0%) and diabetic 
retinopathy (43,658 participants, 7,060 cases, HR 1.34, 1.11–1.61, I2 = 63.9%), but not with glaucoma (6 studies, 
175,357 participants, 44,144 cases, HR 0.97, 0.90–1.04, I2 = 51.5%) or age-related macular degeneration (3 
studies, 800,692 participants, > 2,559 cases, HR 1.15, 0.88–1.50, I 2= 91.0%). 
One US study of 16,690 participants, investigated the inclusion of vision impairment as an additional potentially 
modifiable risk factor in the life-course model based on the 2020 Lancet Commission, and found that the 
population attributable fraction (PAF) of vision impairment was 1.8% in that population. (253) As the prevalence 
of vision impairment was higher in minority groups (9.9% of the Black non-Hispanic population and 11% of the 
Hispanic population compared to 7.7% of the White non-Hispanic population), the risk and potential benefit may 
be greater in these populations. 
Effect of cataract treatment  
A US study followed 3038 older adults (age >65 years) with cataracts and normal cognition at baseline for over 
20 years. (254) The analysis controlled for age, race, APOE genotype, education, smoking, and an extensive list 
of comorbidities and reported that those who had cataract extraction had significantly reduced dementia risk 
compared to those who did not (HR, 0.71; 0.62-0.83; 23,554 person-years of follow-up). Although a UKB study of 
300,823 people found that those with cataracts had an increased risk of dementia (HR, 1.2, 1.01–1.46), but that 
there was no difference in dementia risk between those who had cataract surgery and healthy controls.(255) 

31 

 
 
Mechanism of link between vision impairment and dementia 
The mechanisms behind these associations may be related to underlying illness such as diabetes which is a risk 
factor for dementia, (2) vision loss itself, as might be suggested by a possible effect of cataract surgery, or 
shared neuropathological processes in both the retina and the brain.(256) A Korean longitudinal health 
insurance database study of 6,029,657 people, found that dementia risk increased with visual impairment 
severity, supporting the hypothesis that vision loss in itself may be causal or that there is a dose-response effect 
to a shared aetiological factor.(257) A study of diabetic retinopathy and dementia found that the association 
between retinopathy and dementia remained after adjusting for diabetes severity, as measured by five years of 
glucose levels control and renal function after >5 years of diabetic retinopathy. (258)  

Decision 
increasing evidence supports an association between uncorrected visual impairment and dementia risk, and 
potential modification by treatment. We have therefore included it as a risk factor in our analysis. Treatment for 
visual impairment is effective and cost-effective for an estimated 90% of people but across the world, 
particularly in those living in LMICs visual impairment is often not treated.(253) (249) There is a clear prevention 
opportunity. 

Multicomponent dementia prevention studies  
Multidomain interventions address multiple dementia risk factors through health-related and behavioural 
changes so, in principle, are appropriate for a multifactorial condition. They vary in approach, from detailed 
individualised approaches supported by goal setting in person, or those linked to digital platforms or mobile 
apps. Others are based more on group activities.  The existing evidence is preliminary as there are few 
completed studies but over 40 ongoing trials.(259) A 2021 Cochrane review identified nine multi-domain 
interventions for the prevention of dementia or cognitive decline RCTs with 18,452 participants.(260)  There was 
high certainty of a small benefit on overall cognition (3 RCTs; composite z score  mean difference (MD) 0.03, 
0.01- 0.06, n = 4,617, over 18-36 months), (228, 261, 262) particularly in people with the APOEε4 genotype (2 
RCTs; n = 2,043, follow-up 24-36 months, carriers MD 0.14, 0.04 -0.25, noncarriers MD 0.04, -0.02 to 0.10,), but 
the effect on dementia incidence had wide confidence intervals (2 RCTs;  n = 7256, follow-up 6 to 13 years RR 
0.94, 0.76 -1.18). (263, 264)  Similarly, the pre-DIVA trial addressing cardiovascular risk factors longer term 
follow-up  (median 10.3 years,  participants  aged 70 -78 years at baseline showed similar results regarding 
dementia incidence.(265) Since then two further RCTs have reported. Age Well, recruited 1030 vascular at-risk 
adults in Germany. Nurses instructed intervention participants, to follow a multidomain intervention with two 
follow-up visits and five phone calls over two years. (266)  The intervention was nutrition and medication 
optimisation, and physical, social, and cognitive activity with goals set, and had no effect on cognition over 24 
months compared to controls given general health advice. The investigators thought the intervention was not 
targeted enough or intense enough. The SMARRT trial  ran for two years and recruited 172 adults aged 70-89 
and addressed personalised risk reduction goals with health coaching and nurse visitors over 2 years and found 
a cognitive improvement in the intervention group of 0.14 standard deviations; 0.03-0.25, a 74% improvement 
compared to Health Education control. (267)   

Multicomponent Interventions in MCI 
A systematic review and meta-analysis of multidomain interventions in MCI found 28 RCTs of older adults with 
MCI receiving non-pharmacological multi-domain interventions over up to a year (n=2711) and a moderate 
effect on global cognition (standardised mean difference 0.41, 0.23-0. 59, (I2 = 62%) with improvements in 
executive function and memory compared to single intervention active control. (268) The authors considered 

32 

 
reasons for the heterogeneity including some studies being underpowered but could not draw firm conclusions. 
One smaller systematic review of lifestyle RCTs in people with MCI found only three small RCTs (total n=156) and 
a significant benefit for cognition with low heterogeneity.(269)  

Difficulties in multicomponent intervention studies 
Studies have often recruited participants based on high cardiovascular risk.(262) A systematic review reported 
that the 10-year dementia risk for individuals eligible for four large-scale trials of multidomain (2+ domains) 
interventions(228, 261, 262, 264, 270)  was similar to those deemed ineligible, thus future trials may need to 
more accurately identify people at higher dementia risk.(271)  

Some studies have employed strategies to boost efficacy and adherence, including intervention coaches to 
support behaviour change, digitally delivered personalised and scalable self-management interventions, and 
targeting people of lower SES and people in LMICs. (229, 272-275) These should clarify whether the cognitive 
benefits reported in existing trials can be replicated or increased and whether they are likely to be scalable and 
clinically significant in preventing dementia. It is currently unclear whether the cognitive benefits identified are 
sustainable after intervention cessation, if they translate into a reduction in dementia incidence, or if they can 
be implemented with similar adherence and effectiveness in more resource-deprived in higher risk groups.  
A review of trials for dementia prevention found that only 62% of studies reported any ethnicity data and in 
those, minority ethnic groups accounted for a relatively low percentage of participants.(276) The FINGERS 
study(228) did not report ethnicity or dementia incidence but reported that effects of the intervention on 
cognitive function were the same across socio-economic categories (albeit within a relatively affluent cohort). 
All but 2% of participants in the HATICE study (a computer platform, coach supported goal setting approach) 
were White.(261) Results were not disaggregated by ethnicity but the impact of the intervention was greatest in 
those with the lowest baseline educational attainment.  
Overall, even interventions with modest effects could theoretically have significant preventative effects at the 
population level, including those less affluent or in LMICs. Interventions for individual and multiple risks would 
potentially be cost-effective but scalability is challenging, (7, 277-279) and they may need to be repeated at 
intervals to achieve sustained benefits. 

Total PAF calculation 
We incorporated the two new risk factors - high LDL-C and uncorrected vision impairment and the 12 factors in 
our previous model into our life-course model of dementia. We used the largest recent worldwide meta-
analyses for risk factor prevalence and relative risk and if not available the best data, and sources and 
justifications are detailed in appendix page 2-6. We performed new meta-analyses for the relative risk for 
depression and hearing loss as explained above.  

PAF calculation  
We used all 37,000 participants aged ≥ 45 years from the HUNT study which is a longitudinal population-based 
health study among residents aged 20 years or older in the county of Nord-Trøndelag, Norway (167) (280) (281)  
to estimate communalities (clustering of risk factors) of the 14 risk factors. Appendix 3 (page 5-9) - shows the 
PAF formula, risk factor definitions and steps including Stata code in calculating communality and PAF.  Our 
analysis found five principal components, explaining 54 % of the total variance between the 14 risk factors, 
indicating there was substantial overlap in risk factor prevalence, so we accounted for this in our weighted PAF 
estimates. We estimated that the PAF for all 14 risk factors was 45.3%. Figure 9 shows the life-course model of 
14 potentially modifiable risk factors for dementia. Table 1 displays the prevalence, communality, relative risk, 
unweighted and weighted PAFs adjusted for communality for all 14 potentially modifiable dementia risk factors. 
Numbers in both are rounded so the total is the nearest whole number.  

33 

 
Numbers in figure 9 rounded to whole numbers 

FIGURE 9   

34 

Strengths and limitations 
This is the most comprehensive analysis to date of the PAF for potentially modifiable risk factors for dementia 
and updates previous calculations with newly incorporated risk factors with convincing evidence, and updated 
worldwide estimates of relative risks and prevalence for the risk factors. Selection criteria always have a degree 
of subjectivity which can affect conclusions, so we have presented the evidence on which they were built for 
transparency. We have used the best current evidence for magnitude of risk, but this may have over or under-
estimated it. We used systematic reviews for the chosen risk factors, identified data to calculate communality 
for 14 risk factors and provided new meta-analyses where required for our synthesis. We only did new meta-
analyses for depression and hearing loss (as there were no recent reviews) and may therefore have missed some 
new evidence. We have detailed how we did these but had not pre-registered them. We find a hopeful picture 
with an estimate of nearly half of all cases of dementia being associated with 14 potentially modifiable risk 
factors. 

We used worldwide figures of prevalence where possible, which include disproportionate numbers from HICs 
although we have included evidence that risk factors prevalence varies between countries.(32) (33) Most global 
research is from HICs, so LMICs remain under-represented due to lack of data. We have assumed risk factors 
cause dementia and have included more evidence that changing them has the potential to change the 
prevalence of dementia. We have also not included other risks with less certain evidence and know there will be 
others. There is a lack of evidence on how risk and protective factors might cluster or vary within and across 
different nations.  Participants in HUNT reported a lower prevalence of alcohol abuse than worldwide figures 
and are living in a HICs with a lack of ethnic diversity.  Additionally, we could not find a worldwide estimate of 
prevalence of LDL cholesterol and acknowledge that the use of an estimate from a single cohort study is not 
ideal. Many risk factors are linked to deprivation, for example, where people live and exposure to air pollution, 
or the possibility of finding reasonably priced healthy food within reasonable walking distance and having the 
resources and skills to prepare it, linked to obesity and diabetes. Deprivation is strongly linked to education and 
its incorporation in our communality calculations will reduce the individual effects of these. We remained 
unable to meta-analyse data on air pollution, although the data remains consistent that it is a risk for dementia.  

We have more evidence that longer exposure to a risk has more effect, for example in diabetes, and that risks 
act more strongly in people who are vulnerable, for example air pollution. Thus, it is important to redouble 
efforts to treat existing conditions in the best possible way for all at risk. However, this risk modification affects 
the population but does not guarantee any individual will avoid dementia.  In addition, it is vital to think about 
communities and people with multiple risks where approaches beyond the individual treatment or exhortation 
of behaviour change have potentially larger impact over the longer term.  The length or intensity of an 
intervention required to make a difference is unknown, but it is hopeful that that risk associated with smoking 
can be reduced across time, and indeed may be one of the factors associated with prevalence reductions seen in 
some populations. While association is not causation, the effect on cognition of multicomponent, hearing aid 
and hypertensions RCTs, and the naturalistic changes with reduction in air pollution, cigarette smoking, social 
contact, hearing and vision corrections and increases in cognitive stimulation through work, continue to suggest 
a causal relationship with the clinical expression of dementia. More socially disadvantaged groups in both LMICs 
and HICs are more at risk and should be a priority for intervention. There is considerably more evidence that 
these changes are important for people whether or not they are at increased genetic risk. We have summarised 
key points to highlight our recommendations based on reflecting on the literature we have presented. Although 

35 

 
there are major gaps in our understanding of risk, these should not wait, as there are ways to reduce the 
chances of developing dementia and benefit individuals, families, and society. 

Public health approach  
Though dementia is a leading public health challenge, a public health lens is a relatively novel approach to 
dementia prevention. Risks can be conceptualised as something the individual can change but a public health 
approach recognises the lifecourse generation of ill-health associated with deprivation or disadvantage. The 
socioeconomic patterning of conditions such as type 2 diabetes and obesity, as well as behaviours such as 
smoking and excess alcohol consumption starts in early life.(282) Understanding the cause of risk inequalities such 
as unequal access to education, to healthy and safe environments, and poor occupational conditions can compel 
change in societal conditions to maximise the population reach, cost-effectiveness, and health equity of 
interventions.(283, 284) Since cardiovascular health and smoking partially mediate the relationship between 
socioeconomic deprivation and dementia,(285-288) life-course, population-level approaches to support physical 
activity, not smoking and a non-obesogenic, healthy diet  which could also impact and diabetes are expected to 
have a profound effect on inequalities in dementia prevalence. 

Demonstrating a link between changes in these risk factors and subsequent reduced dementia risk is difficult 
because of the life course accumulation of dementia risk and the long pre-symptomatic build-up of pathology 
means that many years or decades may be necessary to show a difference. Another approach is to use the risk 
(and protective) factors as proxy-outcomes, with assumed causality leading to reduced dementia prevalence. 
Other study designs, such as quasi-experimental studies, also have the potential to provide clarity as to the 
impact of such initiatives on dementia risk. (289)There are several population-level interventions with 
appropriate tailoring to cultural and economic contexts, which could theoretically significantly reduce dementia 
prevalence, inequalities, and system-wide costs, including:  

●  Fiscal policies such as subsidies to increase affordability of healthy foods and taxation to reduce the 
affordability of alcohol, tobacco and unhealthy food; levies to encourage product reformulation; 
removing financial barriers to continuing education and cleaner fuels.(171, 277, 290) 

●  Marketing policies – e.g., reducing advertising exposure to unhealthy products, well designed mass 

media campaigns that shift sociocultural norms. (171, 277, 290, 291)  

●  Legislative and availability policies – e.g., smoking bans in public places, reducing hours of alcohol sales, 
making healthy food more accessible, reducing density of fast-food outlets, provision of safe and high-
quality green spaces and active travel infrastructure, noise exposure reduction and hearing protective 
equipment provision in workplaces, low emission zones to reduce air pollution, and mandating helmet 
use in active travel and sports. (171, 277, 290)    

●  Physical environmental adaptations to make exercising and socialising accessible and safe by optimising 
urban planning, accessibility, and infrastructure, as recommended in the WHO’s Global Age Friendly 
Cities Guide.  

●  Housing policies: Provision of adequate-socially connected housing for older people is a focus of several 
governmental and third sector organisations, with potential to reduce social isolation and loneliness and 
provide support networks for older people.  

Potential risk factors considered with insufficient evidence to include.  
We know there are other potentially modifiable risk factors and there are several others we considered but on 
balance currently we judged that there is not enough consistent evidence to meet our high bar of being included 
as modifiable risk factors. These include too little sleep, an unhealthy diet, infections, and mental health 
conditions. 

36 

 
Sleep 
As we discussed in the last commission, it was unclear whether the association of short and long sleep duration 
(usually defined as ≤5 hours and ≥10 hours respectively) is associated with increased risk of cognitive decline 
and dementia or is because people who are developing dementia have disturbed sleep in the prodromal stage. 
(2, 292-294)   Two meta-analyses included studies using varying definitions, from short being <7 hours and long 
being >8 hours and had a follow-up of <10 years until incident dementia, and their findings of an inverted U-
shaped association between sleep duration and dementia risk remain subject to potential reverse causation 
bias. (293, 295) Some studies are noteworthy because of longer follow-up but no studies reported those who 
developed dementia soon after sleep duration ascertainment separately from those who developed it after 
longer periods. (280, 296-301)   The reverse causation hypothesis is supported by a longitudinal MRI brain 
imaging study of 3893 healthy adults which found that brain atrophy rates were not associated with either 
longer or shorter sleep duration nor quality of sleep when controlling for BMI, socio-economic status and 
mood.(302) However cross -sectionally sleep duration was associated with cortical thickness and the authors 
suggest that normal brains support normal sleep duration. 
Short sleep duration 
In the million-woman study of 830,716 women (mean age 60 years at baseline) with a 17-year follow-up, there 
was a slightly higher risk of dementia (RR 1.08, 1.04-1.12) among those who reported shorter but not very short 
sleep duration (<7 hours). In the Whitehall II study, persistent short sleep duration ≤6 hours at age 50, 60, and 
70 compared to persistent normal sleep duration  (7 hours) was associated with a 30% increased dementia risk 
independently of sociodemographic, behavioural, cardiometabolic, and mental health factors.(303) In a 
Norwegian cohort of 7492 people with follow-up of 11 years, insomnia (which may differ from short sleep 
duration), was not associated with all-cause dementia, AD or cognitive score.  
Shift work. 
Shift work, where some work is outside the normal working day, may disrupt the circadian rhythm and this may 
increase the risk of cardiovascular disease and some other illnesses. A systematic review found heterogenous 
evidence of dementia risk and could not draw conclusions.(304) A subsequent UKB study examined whether 
shift work might be related to dementia and followed 170,722 people, aged in their early 50s at baseline, for a 
median of 12.4 years, of whom 27,450 (16.1%) did shift work.  It was associated with an increased risk of 
dementia (HR 1.30, 1.08–1.58) but this was not increased further in night shift compared to day shift workers, 
although the power to detect differences was low. (305) 
Long sleep duration and napping 
In a Swedish cohort of 28,775 individuals aged 65 years and older, the association between long sleep duration 
and dementia over a 13-year follow-up was completely attenuated after cases occurring in the first 5 years of 
follow-up were excluded from the analysis, highlighting the role of reverse causation bias.(300) Similarly,  in the 
US million woman study there was no association between long sleep duration (>8 hours) or daytime napping 
and dementia on longer term follow-up after the first five years.(306)  A UKB MR study found a small association 
between habitual napping and higher brain volume (unstandardized ß 15.80 cm3, 0.25- 31.34) but no difference 
in hippocampal volume or cognitive tests.(307)  
Sleep apnoea. 
Along with duration of sleep, emerging evidence suggests that quality of sleep, specifically sleep apnoea, may be 
associated with dementia. A systematic review and meta-analysis of eleven studies including 1,333,424 
participants follow up of up to 14.9 years found people with sleep apnoea had an increased risk of developing 
dementia (HR 1.43, 1.26–1.62). (308)  Few of these studies adjusted for obesity. It may be worth considering 
screening questions about dementia in people with sleep apnoea. 

37 

Mechanisms 
Sleep disturbances are postulated to increase dementia risk through several processes.(292)  They often co-
occur with other conditions affecting dementia risk (e.g., diabetes, depression, alcohol consumption). In 
addition, people with impaired sleep may be treated with benzodiazepines which may be related to cognitive 
decline. One systematic review and meta-analysis found very low quality evidence of an increased risk of 
dementia in people taking benzodiazepines in 11 studies with follow-up over 72–264 months (OR 1.38, 1.07–
1.77; I2 = 98%; n=980,860 ).(309)  A prospective cohort study found that the risk was higher in those with low 
benzodiazepines dosage compared to those taking higher doses, suggesting the relationship is not causal.(310) 
Experimental studies support a detrimental effect of acute sleep deprivation on immediate cognitive 
performance.(311)  
Biological mechanisms include neuroinflammation,(312) atherosclerosis,(313) alpha-synucleinopathies 
(dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson disease dementia),(314) and impaired amyloid-β clearance.(315) 
However,  this usually occurs during deep sleep at the beginning of the night, which lasts one to two hours so is 
unlikely to be affected in those reporting sleep disturbances. (316-318)  Amyloid plaque build-up contributes to 
poor sleep in older adults through its direct impact on sleep-wake regulator brain regions.(319, 320) There is 
also some evidence of an association of Aβ accumulation with disruption of the circadian rhythm and sleep 
pattern in cognitively normal adults.(321)  

Decision 
Since the last commission, further evidence indicates that prolonged sleep is not a risk factor for dementia, 
although dementia and its prodrome may cause prolonged sleep. People should not curtail their sleep to reduce 
dementia risk. Benzodiazepines do not appear to cause dementia. 

Overall, current evidence appears to indicate that short sleep duration may be associated with a small, increased 
risk of dementia but there is a lack of evidence about the characterisation of short sleep, and no information on 
sleep quality or circadian rhythm disturbance which may be the factors associated with increased risk of 
developing dementia rather than length of sleep. Therefore, the evidence about short sleep has not yet been 
clarified enough to be sure of causation. We are unable to make recommendations on sleep as a risk factor. 

Diet 
As we previously discussed, nutrition and individual dietary components are challenging to research and there 
are contradictory findings regarding their link with cognition and dementia.(2)  A diet encompasses multiple 
healthy and unhealthy food and drinks and is often part of a way of life, so observed effects may be related to 
lifestyle or be independent of them.(322)  The Mediterranean and similar diets tend to be less available in 
LMICs. 

Observational studies of whole diets, dementia, AD pathology and brain atrophy  
Similar healthy diets include the Mediterranean diet, dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH) diet, and 
the Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) diet which is the Mediterranean 
diet plus specific healthy foods.  The WHO makes a conditional recommendation of  Mediterranean diet for risk 
reduction in dementia meaning they were unsure about the balance of evidence  between desirable and 
undesirable effects. (116)   Since then there have been several new studies. One systematic review and meta-
analysis identified 16 cohort studies with follow-up from 2.2 to 41 years.(323) High diet quality relative to low 
diet quality was associated with lower dementia risk (RR 0.8, 0.7 -0.95; n=66,930; 12 studies). This risk was 
similar when only studies which had follow-up for >10 years were included (RR 0.78, 0.62-0.99, 6 studies) or 
when restricted to the outcome of AD. In contrast, they reported that studies using a continuous Mediterranean 

38 

diet score found no significant association between Mediterranean diet adherence and risk of dementia. A 
subsequent larger meta-analysis of three cohort studies with 224 049 participants found higher adherence to 
the MIND diet score was associated with lower risk of dementia (HR for every 3-point increment, 0.83; 0.72-
0.95;  I2 = 0%).(324) A third systematic review reported protection in 10 of 21 studies of the Mediterranean diet 
against global cognitive decline; 3 of 8 studies against incident dementia and 2 of 4 studies against AD in 
particular.(325)    

Since these reviews, a Swedish prospective cohort of 28,025 people in midlife (mean age at first assessment 58 
years, median follow-up 19.8 years) reported neither adherence to dietary recommendations nor to the 
modified Mediterranean diet lowered the risk of dementia, AD or VD or AD pathology. (326)  These results 
remained the same when those who developed dementia in the five years after baseline were excluded.   In 
contrast, a UKB study (n=60,298, mean age at baseline 63.8, mean follow up 9.1 years) reported adherence to 
the Mediterranean diet was associated with lower dementia risk independent of APOE status. (327)A US cohort 
of older people (n =581, mean age at first assessment =84) found MIND and Mediterranean dietary patterns, 
particularly consumption of green leafy vegetables, inversely correlated with beta-amyloid load, phosphorylated 
tau tangles and global AD pathology at post-mortem. (328) 
Ultraprocessed foods 
Ultraprocessed food (UPF) are formulations of processed food substances (oils, fats, sugars, starch, and protein 
isolates) containing little or no whole foods.  Classifications of food vary as the definition is vague. A cross-
sectional US study of 3,632 participants aged ≥60 years found overall cognitive performance and memory were 
not associated with the percentage of daily energy intake dietary from UPF after correction for confounders. 
(329) A  longitudinal study from Brazil (n= 10, 775, mean age at baseline 51.6, 5,880 participants (54.6%) 
women, 5723 (53.1%) White, median follow-up 8 years) where individuals whose UPF consumption was in the 
highest three quartiles, reported a 28% faster rate of global cognitive decline (β -0.004; -0.006 to -0.001) and a 
25% faster rate of executive function decline (β -0.003, -0.005 to 0.000) compared with those in the lowest 
quartile after adjustment for relevant sociodemographic and clinical variables. (330) These studies are not long 
enough to rule out reverse causation bias.  

Omega fats 
A French study  (n=1279, mean age at baseline 74.3, follow-up 17 years)  found higher levels of omega-3 index in 
plasma  were associated with a lower risk of dementia (HR for 1 standard deviation 0.87, 0.76–0.98), and a lower 
decline in medial temporal lobe volume.(331)  

Microbiome  
Gut microbiome encompasses all microbes in the gut. Changes in it occur as people age or from obesity, diet, 
infection, CVD, sleep issues or lack of physical activity. It has been suggested that the changes in the microbiome 
mediate the effects of diet on the brain(322) and facilitate neuro-inflammation and cell death and are a risk 
factor for dementia. (332) Few studies have examined the associations of gut microbiome with dementia, and 
we cannot draw any conclusions. 

Dietary interventions  
Designing dietary interventions is difficult as the right doses, forms, timing in life and duration remain 
unclear.(322)  The caveats in long term RCTs outlined above in terms of practicality, ethics and bias are 
particularly salient here.  The commission previously found convincing evidence that vitamins did not prevent 
cognitive deterioration in the general population as did the WHO (2, 116)  Since then further studies have not 
produced convincing benefit. 

39 

A three-year RCT of a dietary educational intervention - dietary counselling and either MIND diet or mild calorie-
controlled diet testing in 604 older people without cognitive impairment, a positive family history of dementia, a 
BMI >25, and a suboptimal diet, found no between group differences in global cognition and a secondary brain 
MRI outcome. (333) Both groups improved in cognitive score, had a similar weight loss of around 5kg and similar 
MRI outcomes. 

COSMOS-MIND, was a three-year RCT, nested in the cardiovascular COSMOS RCT in 2262 volunteer participants 
(mean age = 73). The trial tested separately daily cocoa extract (primary analysis) and multivitamin-mineral 
(MVM).(334) Cocoa extract (plus or minus MVM) had no effect on global cognition and MVM supplementation 
led to a small, not clinically, but statistically significant, global cognition benefit (mean z 0.07, 0.02- 0.12) in 
memory and executive function. The authors suggested further studies in those at greater risk.  
COSMOS-WEB was a subset of COSMOS that substantially overlapped with COSMOS-MIND but examined only 
those randomized to cocoa extract or placebo and found that the flavanol intervention did not enhance memory 
over 1 to 3 years.(335)  A 24 week RCT of anthocyanins (flavonoid found in berries and fruit, thought to be anti-
inflammatory, antioxidant and to improve lipid profile) in 206 people age 60 to 80 years old without dementia  
found no difference in cognitive outcomes.(336)  They thought this may be because of lack of power and 
duration as there was a difference between the slopes of cognitive decline. 

Decisions 
Nutritional epidemiology studies often but inconsistently report an association between diet and biomarkers, 
cognitive decline, dementia, or AD. Studies are of few, mostly Western diets. Clinical trials have generally 
reported that nutritional and dietary interventions do not reduce cognitive impairment. Intervention results are 
small, heterogenous, usually not statistically significant, and, at best could be considered hypothesis generating 
findings, but do not support the primary hypotheses. Positive results in some subgroups indicate that future 
investigation may be useful. There is indication that interventions may need to be longer to have an effect.  

Eating a diet high in fruit and vegetables and low in ultra-processed foods is good for many health conditions 
and impacts dementia risk factors of obesity, diabetes, and hypertension but there is not enough evidence to 
say they are directly useful for dementia prevention. There is a lack of data on the effect of malnutrition in early 
life.  

Infections and systemic inflammation 
In one IPD meta-analysis, severe peripheral systemic infections requiring hospitalisation were linked to higher 
dementia risk and associations persisted after adjustment for age, sex, SES, health behaviours, BMI, 
hypertension, diabetes and APOE genotype (HR 1·22,1·09-1·36).  (337)  This may partly be explained by higher 
rates of dementia and brain vulnerability in people hospitalised with infection who have a smaller brain volume 
and lower white matter integrity than age-matched controls who are not hospitalised. (338, 339) A subsequent 
electronic register study of almost 1 million UK adults, showed that infections resulting in hospitalisation, but 
not those treated in primary care, were associated with a higher risk of dementia or AD. (340) Several viruses 
and bacteria were associated with dementia risk and risk was elevated more in those with CNS infections but 
also with extra-CNS infection. (337, 341, 342) (337) In the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (N=1009), 
accelerated white matter atrophy was observed among individuals with a history of symptomatic herpetic 
infections. (343) although another study found no association between Herpes Simplex infection and cognitive 
decline or brain atrophy. (344) 

Sepsis, pneumonia, lower respiratory tract infections, skin and soft tissue infections and urinary tract infections 
are all associated with higher rates of dementia in people and animal studies. (340) Similarly, raised peripheral 

40 

 
inflammatory markers are linked to higher dementia risk with one meta-analysis of 10 studies with follow-up 
ranging from two to 25 years. reporting the highest compared to lowest quartile C reactive protein (CRP) had a 
higher dementia risk (HR 1.34, 1.05-1.71) with similar results for Interleukin 6 (IL-6) in four studies (HR 1.40, 
1.13-1.74] and a1-antichymotrypsin in three studies (HR 1.54, 1.14-2.08) but not Lp-PLA2 (HR 1.06, 0.94-1.18). 
(345) Higher inflammatory marker levels are also associated with more cognitive decline.(346)  

There is currently little longitudinal evidence on the long-term impact of COVID-19 and evidence in this area is 
about the effect of COVID-19 on cognitive function and biomarkers, not on dementia risk. COVID-19 may 
increase the risk of cognitive impairment with one meta-analysis finding slightly more impairment in global 
cognition 7 months after infection in adults with no known history of cognitive impairment than in controls 
(MOCA score MD-0.94; -1.59- -0.29).(347) In addition, declines in grey matter thickness and total brain size have 
been reported 6 months after SARS-CoV-2 infection in 785 UKB participants compared to those not infected. 
(348)  It may also increase risks by changing population habits, for example, so people take less exercise or are 
more likely to be obese. (349) 

Mechanisms of the effects of infection and inflammation  
The mechanisms by which infections may contribute to higher dementia risk remain poorly understood and are 
likely to be bidirectional, with people with cognitive impairment and dementia more severely affected by 
infection and more likely to be admitted to hospital. Although the blood-brain barrier (BBB) protects the brain, 
there are multiple mechanisms for peripheral and central immune communication, including direct pathways of 
peripheral immune cell infiltration across the BBB and indirect pathways of systemic inflammation-driven 
modulation of CNS microglial function. (350, 351) Animal and in-vitro studies demonstrate that inflammatory 
stimuli may initiate long-term priming of the microglia, peripheral CD4+ and CD8+ T cells to a proinflammatory 
state, (352-354) potentially increasing amyloid plaque deposition.(355) Long-term immune activation and 
systemic inflammation can also adversely affect brain capillaries, increasing BBB permeability and related entry 
of neurotoxic plasma components, blood cells, and pathogens into the brain. (356, 357) As hospital-treated 
infections are more strongly associated with vascular than Alzheimer’s dementia, mechanisms may involve 
vascular inflammatory pathways. (337, 340) BBB dysfunction has been linked to microbleeds and perivascular 
oedema, compromising microcirculation and inducing ischaemic damage.(358) Furthermore, infections and 
related systemic inflammation can trigger macrovascular events, including stroke, further increasing dementia 
risk. 

Interventions with vaccines, anti-inflammatory or antibiotic drugs 
Meta-analyses of observational studies suggest that vaccinations against rabies, tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, 
herpes zoster, influenza, hepatitis A, typhoid and hepatitis B are associated with lower dementia risk, although 
this may be partly due to confounding factors as people who receive vaccinations may have different health 
behaviours and access to health care compared to those who do not.(359) One population cohort study using 
UK GP records of 13,383,431 adults age >50 years old found no effect of vaccines on the risk of dementia when 
adjusted for potential confounders. (360) 

One systematic review and meta-analysis concluded there was no strong evidence from larger RCTs of 
interventions which modify infection and inflammation, reduce cognitive impairment, or risk or progression of 
dementia. (361)  Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication for AD, such as naproxen and celecoxib in older 
adults with a family history of AD over 1 to 3-years or aspirin 100mg for older people over 9.6 years did not 
decrease dementia risk, (362) although they did increase adverse events. (363) Minocycline, a tetracycline 
antibiotic which protects against the toxic effects of β-amyloid in vitro and in animal models of AD, did not delay 

41 

the progression of cognitive impairment in people with mild AD over a 2-year period in a multicentre clinical 
trial.(364) 

Interventions such as vaccinations, hand washing and ventilation that avoid infection and therefore reduce risk 
or severity of inflammation and vascular events are good for general health and may lower dementia risk.  

Dental disease 
Dental disease, including gum inflammation (periodontal) disease is associated with chronic, inflammation-
driven disorders and has been suggested to be a risk factor for dementia.(365)  People with better childhood 
cognitive function have better dental health and, throughout life, use more preventative dental care and lose 
fewer teeth than their counterparts, and this precedes by many decades potential mechanisms of compromised 
nutrition, chronic periodontitis and inflammation related to dental disease.(366) 

A nationwide Swedish study controlling for demographic, socioeconomic and wider health conditions of people 
aged 40 to 80, did not find a higher incidence of dementia in 7992 individuals with caries and periodontal 
disease than 29,182 matched controls over 7.6 years.(367)  A US study controlling for demographic, vascular 
health and SES, found that in 3521 people aged ≥ 65 years different (but not the same) periodontal disease were 
associated with either all cause dementia or AD or AD death over 26 years of follow-up.(368) The dental disease 
group had had less education, lower disposable income, and more comorbidities. Currently there is not 
consistent, high-quality evidence that dental and periodontal disease is a risk factor for dementia. 

Decisions 
The extent to which infections and inflammation are modifiable dementia risk factors remains unclear, as most 
studies are in older people with relatively short follow-up. Specific pathogens cross the BBB, such as syphilis, HIV 
and herpes and are diseases which directly cause dementia. This is not the same as infection being a risk itself. 
Inflammation may be a common pathway for many risks factors for dementia.  
Bipolar disorder 
A review of five longitudinal studies examined associations between bipolar disorder and dementia, with follow-
up durations from 4 to 11 years.(104) There was no meta-analysis as several studies used the same database 
and were based on one of two population-based cohorts (in Western Australia or Taiwan), but there was a 
consistent association between bipolar disorder and dementia risk (HR between 2.31 to 4.55). One included 
study found greater illness severity related to higher dementia risk, the rate of dementia was higher in 
individuals who had 1-2 psychiatric admissions (RR 2.4, 1.9–3.1) and >2 admissions (5.7, 4.8–6.8) per year. 
Compared to those with no admissions. There was heterogeneity in the extent to which studies adjusted for 
factors such as cardiovascular risk, comorbidities, and alcohol consumption.  

Psychotic disorders including schizophrenia. 
A  2022  systematic  review  of  11  population-based  cohort  studies  including  13  million  people  found  an  overall 
increased risk of all-cause dementia over median 11 years (RR 2.52, 1.67–3.80), although heterogeneity was high 
(I2  99.7%).(369)  Most  included  studies  were  of  individuals  with  schizophrenia,  and  only  one  study  specifically 
reported findings for early onset schizophrenia (<40 years), which showed higher dementia risk than controls but 
lower risk than late-onset schizophrenia (>40 years).(370) Another lifespan study included in the review also found 
lower dementia risk in younger (18-49 years) versus older individuals with schizophrenia.(371) However, a third 
lifespan study found higher dementia risk in the youngest (18-60 years) versus older age of onset groups with 
psychotic disorders,(372) potentially attributable to more deaths in older cohorts. Studies varied in the degree of 
adjustment for age, sex, comorbidities, alcohol, smoking, medications, income and education levels and there was 

42 

no conclusive evidence on the potential impact of specific comorbidities or antipsychotic medication on dementia 
risk, or risk for specific dementia types. 

Mechanisms 
People with schizophrenia have lower brain volumes at illness onset than the age-matched population  
suggesting a neurodevelopmental cause, (373) and cognitive impairment, a core feature of schizophrenia, is 
already present at illness onset.(374) There is no clear link between this cognitive impairment and specific AD-
related neuropathology.(375) (376)  and despite mainly experiencing normal age-related trajectories of 
cognitive functioning during mid-life, they show accelerated brain aging (in neuroimaging) compared to healthy 
controls and people with depression and bipolar disorder.(377) One systematic review found that cardiovascular 
risk factors including metabolic syndrome (13 studies; n = 2800; effect size [ES] 0.31; 0.13-0.50), diabetes (8 
studies; n = 2976; ES = 0.32; 0.23-0.42), or hypertension (5 studies; n = 1899; ES0.21; 0.11-0.31)  in people with 
schizophrenia were associated with significantly worse cognition. This higher prevalence of known dementia risk 
factors throughout mid-life, such as cardiovascular disease, hyperlipidaemia, obesity, smoking and social 
isolation  contribute to further cognitive decline in older age.(378) People with very late-onset (>60 years) 
schizophrenia-like psychosis (VLOSLP) have a particularly high risk of developing dementia with a HR 4.22.(379) 
Although some of this can be explained by potential misdiagnosis of psychosis symptoms in dementia as 
VLOSLP, dementia diagnosis rates remain higher in this group for 20 years following diagnosis, and it may 
represent a dementia prodrome. 

Decisions 
Overall, there is consistent evidence that people with schizophrenia have more and earlier dementia than 
others, including those with depression and bipolar disorder. (380)  People with schizophrenia have high 
cardiovascular morbidity and less education as well as cognitive impairment related to schizophrenia. We 
currently judge that it is unclear that schizophrenia independently predisposes to dementia beyond the fact that 
people with schizophrenia more often have other risk factors.  We do not know if early intervention can modify 
pre-existing cognitive impairment specific to schizophrenia. There is relatively evidence on dementia risk in 
bipolar disorder, but findings have been consistent regarding an increased risk. We recommend, in line with 
policy in some countries, that people with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are considered at risk and 
enhanced attention is paid to treating modifiable dementia risk factors.  

Anxiety 
A review of seven longitudinal studies found no increased risk of dementia in people with anxiety disorders (RR 
1.18, 0.96-1.45) although individual studies had mixed findings and results were not adjusted for depression. 
(104) A subsequent study of 2551 adults aged 60 to 64  followed for 12 years, found no association of anxiety 
disorders themselves with cognition (after adjusting for depression) or with cognitive decline.(381) Those who 
responded to psychological treatment for anxiety had a lower incidence of all-cause dementia (median 3 years 
later, HR 0.83, 0.78-0.88) than those who did not.(382) This may suggest that those who are anxious as part of 
preclinical dementia are less likely to respond to treatment. A meta-analysis found no association between 
anxiety symptoms and Aβ (N = 5141, 13 studies) or tau (N = 1126, 4 studies) in cognitively healthy adults.(383) 

Post-traumatic stress disorder  
A  systematic review of the associations between post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and dementia found 
three studies in US, Denmark and Taiwan with sample sizes from 8750 to 489,994  and all observed higher risk of 
dementia in 11 to 17 years follow-up, ranging from HR 1.70 to 4.37.(104)  The risk was more marked in those 
with depression but remained after adjustment for depression. An earlier systematic review and meta-analysis 

43 

which included these studies and another five studies suggested PTSD is a risk factor for dementia, although 
there was considerable heterogeneity between the included studies(HR 1.61, 1.43–1.81, I2=85.8).(384) Despite 
the increased dementia risk, a follow-up study over 5 years found no increase in AD pathology in people with 
PTSD and suggested the increased dementia risk is from other causes. (385) There is only one meta-analysis and 
evidence is too heterogenous to generalise and conclude at this stage that PTSD is a modifiable risk factor for 
dementia. 

Menopause and hormone replacement therapy 
The role of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) was not discussed in the last commission, but it has been 
suggested that menopause and HRT may partially explain the higher prevalence of dementia in women than 
men. Meta-analytic data found that woman with menopause occurring after age 45 had a lower risk than those 
who had younger age, RR: 0.87, 0.78-0.97, I-2 =56.0%. (386) 

Two nested case-control studies, using routinely collected primary care data from 16,291 women with dementia 
and 68,726 controls who had taken HRT for ≥3 years found increased risks of developing AD in women who had 
used oestrogen-progestogen therapy for between five and nine years (RR 1.11, 1.04-1.20) and for 10 years or 
more (RR 1.19, 1.06-1.33). (387, 388)  In line with this, 5589 Danish women who had used oestrogen-
progestogen therapy aged 50 to 60 compared to those who had never used it had an increased risk of all cause 
dementia and AD (HR 1.24, 1.17-1.33). Risk increased with more years of use, ranging from HR 1.21 for ≤1 year 
to 1.74 for >12 years of use. (389) Those taking HRT had increased risk whether they started it at younger or 
older ages (>age 55 years). The same risk was not found for progesterone-only or oestrogen-only therapy, and 
another study showed a lower risk of all cause dementia among those aged <80 years old who had been taking 
oestrogen-only therapy for ≥10 years (OR 0.85;  0.76 - 0.94) but not in those who had taken it for less time.(388) 

Intervention studies 
A meta-analysis of 23 heterogenous RCTs, 9 of which combined oestrogen and progesterone use, reported any 
HRT had a small but statistically significant negative effect on global cognition (MD −0.04,  −0.08 to −0.01, 
I2 = 0.0%).(390)  Subgroup analysis found no positive effect in short or long term use of HRT in different age 
groups but a more negative effect if initiated after age 60. A further meta-analysis of RCTs found high quality 
evidence that post-menopausal women should not take oestrogen-only therapy to prevent dementia and some 
evidence that it increased the risk. (361)   

Decisions 
Overall, it is unclear whether menopause and HRT are causally related to dementia risk. There is some evidence 
that oestrogen-only therapy, and later-initiation of HRT, may increase dementia risk.  

Multimorbidity and frailty  
People who have more chronic illnesses and more severe illness are at higher risk of dementia, particularly if 
these illnesses begin in midlife.(391, 392) Up to 24% of people aged 50 and over are estimated to have frailty 
and this is more common in women.(393) In older Americans more frailty was associated with  lower 
neuropsychological test score, (394) and a higher risk of developing MCI and dementia (HR 1.66, 1.55-1.78 and 
HR 1.14, 1.02-1.28 respectively per 0.1 increase on frailty index). (395) A further study of 1.7 million New 
Zealand adults over 30 years follow-up found that physical illness (defined as coronary heart disease, gout, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, cancer, traumatic brain injury, stroke and myocardial 
infarction), was associated with dementia risk (RR 1.19, 1.16-1.21).(372) In a UKB study of 206,960 participants, 
multimorbidity was associated with a 1.63-fold (1.55-1.71) increased risk of incident dementia over 15 years 
follow-up after adjusting for age, sex, ethnicity, education, socioeconomic status, and APOEε4 status.(392) The 

44 

risk was highest in individuals with cardiovascular and cardiometabolic clusters of disease and those with the 
lower genetic risk of dementia. Outcome-wide studies, such as the Danish disease trajectory,(396) Finnish 
community-dwelling studies(397) and the Health Improvement Network in French and UK GP-records, (397) 
linked dementia risk to a wide range of diseases, which may be related to other risk factors,  including sequelae 
of cerebrovascular disease, osteoporosis, severe infections, and mental disorders. Overall health, quantified by 
the degree of frailty, independently contributes to the risk of dementia in relation to neuropathology,(398)  
Alzheimer disease biomarkers (399) and polygenic risk score,(400) so dementia risk conveyed by each of these is 
higher in frailer individuals. 

Interventions and care in dementia 

Diagnosis  

The path to diagnosis 
Timely diagnosis of dementia is a priority in many countries because a diagnosis and identification of underlying 
causes and contributors is beneficial in enabling management and planning.(401)   This is distinct from screening 
and as set out in the last commission, the only trial of dementia screening showed neither benefit nor harm and 
so we do not recommend it.(402)  

A review of people seeking diagnosis from 32 studies across 13 countries, found that people with suspected 
dementia and family carers reported multiple barriers and facilitators to diagnosis.(403) Barriers included: 
denial, stigma and fear, lack of knowledge, normalisation of symptoms, desire to preserve autonomy, lack of 
perceived need, unawareness of changes, lack of family and friends network support, carer difficulties, problems 
accessing help and lack of preparedness of services to make a diagnosis. Enablers included: recognition of 
symptoms as a problem, prior knowledge and contacts, and support from informal networks.  

Equity in Diagnosis 
Much of the work on the pathways to diagnosis comes from HICs. The identification of dementia as a medical 
condition has been challenging in LMICs, where despite a paucity of studies we know health care is under-
resourced and tends to focus on infectious disease, with mental health disorders often stigmatised and hence 
hidden and where some people are still unaware of the illness of dementia. (404) (405)  More people in LMICs 
present in late stages than in HICs, perhaps due to several factors including good support at home as well as lack 
of public health education, awareness, resources, accessibility, stigma and belief.(404, 406)  Additionally, many 
research instruments, even when termed cross-cultural, were developed in HICs and are unsuitable for people 
with low levels of literacy or are culturally biased.(407) (408)  

Dementia incidence(409-411) and prevalence (38) is higher in some minority ethnic groups in countries such as 
the US and UK. Notably, this is when measured by population-based survey rather than using electronic health 
records, indicating an under-recording or under use of services by some groups in routine data.(412) Cognitive 
screening tools that have primarily been developed in White, English-speaking populations, may be unsuitable in 
more diverse populations as they are affected by education and cultural background.(413)  It is therefore key 
that cognitive assessment includes awareness of cultural diversity within the populations they serve, using tools 
that are not dependent on literacy and education level as appropriate.(414) One possible quality indicator for 
dementia care is the diagnosis proportion, but recording of dementia is lower for some ethnic groups,  so any 
assumption of a similar prevalence is likely to be inaccurate for many of the minoritised population. These 
measures are therefore likely unfit to determine access to diagnosis.  

45 

Timely diagnosis 
There has been little evaluation of the relative clinical and cost-effectiveness of different models of service 
delivery.(415) This means a lack of clarity about ‘what good looks like’ in terms of diagnostic services and care, 
and there is only indirect evidence that diagnosis of dementia is beneficial.(416) 

The rationale for early or timely diagnosis is to sustain people with dementia and their family’s well-being and 
health by opening the door to care and treatment.  A diagnosis upholds an individual’s right to know about their 
illnesses.(401)  One review found that up to 92% of people with a diagnosis of dementia said they wanted to 
know their diagnosis, (417) and another that 91% of those diagnosed saw benefits in getting the diagnosis, and 
60% wished they had known the diagnosis earlier.(418) These were people who had a diagnosis although not 
necessarily those who sought one early. The views of those people without a diagnosis were not represented in 
these studies.  

Diagnosis can provide psychological benefits and time to adjust. It facilitates access to services when they are 
available that provide practical information, advice, guidance, and psychological and drug treatments. These can 
support people’s ability to better manage their condition, plan for the future, and make decisions about care, 
support, financial and legal affairs whilst they have capacity.(419)  Potential economic benefits from reducing 
health and social care costs by preventing unnecessary admissions to hospitals and care-homes have been 
modelled.(418, 420, 421)  It is currently unknown whether any therapies can modify the disease course in AD to 
reduce dementia risk.   

There are theoretical harms of a diagnosis of dementia,(419, 422) for example, early diagnosis might be 
associated with increased risks of depression, anxiety, or social withdrawal, particularly if post-diagnostic 
interventions and care are unavailable. There is evidence from a US  national cohort of a lower risk of suicide in 
people with a diagnosis of dementia (HR 0.71, 0.53-0.94 ) but an increase in  short-term suicide attempts after 
people were informed they had MCI or dementia (RR 1.73, 1.34-2.22; RR 1.44, 1.17-1.77 respectively).(423) 
There was no  long-term increase in suicide attempts.   

Mobile and wearable devices hold promise for detection and diagnosis of neurodegenerative disease as their 
routine use in the general population is widespread and increasing, and they can contain multiple sensors to 
study physical changes and cognitive abilities. (424) Nonetheless, a review of 20 mobile phone applications 
(apps) (425) reported none met criteria for use as a screening tool. Another review of 275 apps (426) suggested 
that those with artificial intelligence capabilities and use of machine learning had potential for detection and 
monitoring and should be further evaluated. There will be challenges in the existing data that inform such AI, 
particularly from the lack of representation of diversity.  

The balance of evidence and ethical principles finds that people should have access to timely and accurate 
diagnosis with appropriate interventions when they are seeking help, but the evidence does not justify screening 
the whole population for dementia. 

Biomarkers in AD 
Research on biomarkers for Alzheimer pathology has progressed since the last commission. Biomarkers that 
measure amyloid (A),  tau (T), and neurodegeneration (N) are now incorporated in some definitions of AD 
pathology,  the “amyloid–tau–neurodegeneration” or A/T/N approach, but the presence of these biomarkers 
does not mean that someone has dementia.(427, 428) However, their absence indicates the likely absence of 
Alzheimer’s pathology (but does not exclude other causes of dementia).(429)  

46 

Neuroimaging 
Computer Tomography (CT) can show vascular changes, atrophy and other reasons for neurodegeneration and 
is cheaper and more accessible, but the precision is lower than Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI).  Although 
several modalities of MRI exist, the simplest is structural MRI (for cerebral atrophy, primarily in the 
hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and medial temporal lobe.) 

More advanced techniques include diffusion tensor imaging, arterial spin labelling, magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy, functional MRI, and Positron Emission Tomography (PET, in vivo measurement of disease 
pathology using ligands). The limitations of all these advanced imaging techniques include cost, patient’s 
consent and suitability, expertise required to interpret the results, although automated assessment performs 
nearly as well.(430) Amyloid-PET and tau-PET correlate with post-mortem amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary 
tangles.  

CSF biomarkers  
A low cerebrospinal fluid CSF Abeta42/Abeta40 ratio alone or combined with high phosphorylated tau (p-tau) is 
correlated with amyloid plaques and Alzheimer pathology. There is also potential to use amyloid and p-tau 
molecular (fluid) biomarkers as a way to evaluate underlying Alzheimer disease pathology as a potential cause of 
dementia or cognitive impairment, and in an asymptomatic population to determine those at higher risk of 
developing AD for inclusion in clinical trial populations (431, 432) but there are  important considerations in 
their interpretation. Biochemical changes in the brain are reflected in the CSF because of its contact with the 
extracellular space in the brain. These biomarkers are essentially proteins (total tau, phosphorylated tau, and 
Aβ42, neurofilament light, neurogranulin) that have been validated against imaging modalities. The advantage 
of CSF biomarkers is their ability to detect early phases of disease and they have recently been related to 
cognitive decline and clinical conversion in studies changing 9-18 years before diagnosis. (433) (434, 435) Their 
disadvantages are cost, the need for specialized health care services, and the patient’s perception of its 
invasiveness. 

CSF-based assays are well‐established in the clinical diagnosis of Creutzfeldt‐Jakob disease A similar approach 
has been developed for Lewy body disease and assays to detect neuronal α-synuclein (n-αsyn) in CSF show great 
promise. (436, 437) A recent meta-analysis showed pooled sensitivities of 0.88 and specificities of 0.95 in 
distinguishing synucleinopathies from controls. (438) As with AD, biomarkers of Lewy body pathology become 
positive before dementia or parkinsonism and so may be not necessarily be the cause of cognitive symptoms, 
especially in older adults. Further work is needed to clarify the position of n-αsyn assays in clinical practice, but 
they are likely to play growing roles. As with other assays data are lacking from diverse cohorts. 

Meaning and measurement of predictive markers 
Multiple neuropathologies are common in older populations and more common than Alzheimer pathology alone 
(see figure 1). (20)  Amyloid prevalence is age-related (>20% over age 70years; >30% by age 80).(439) This 
means that in older individuals a positive amyloid biomarker must be interpreted cautiously: it reflects amyloid 
pathology, but it may not be causing any impairment. Nonetheless, if someone is negative for amyloid 
biomarkers it means AD is unlikely – irrespective of age.  As amyloid accumulation occurs many years before the 
onset of neurodegeneration or cognitive symptoms a positive amyloid biomarker alone is not a strong predictor 
of future impairment.  

As discussed in the last commission, most cognitively normal people who are amyloid positive, do not develop 
Alzheimer’s dementia over the next 10 years, or during their lifetime. In a US volunteer sample, at age 70, 10% 
of women were amyloid positive but 1% had Alzheimer’s dementia. (440) By age 85 these figures were 33% 

47 

positive versus 9% Alzheimer’s dementia with figures similar for men. One community-based autopsy cohort 
study of amyloid (A), tauopathy (T), and neurodegeneration (N) markers found only 8% of (A+T–[N])  compared 
t68% of (A+T+[N]) were associated with incident dementia in the last 5 years of life.(441)  

Tau PET uptake occurs at a later stage and age than amyloid Pet and is more closely associated with cognitive 
dysfunction than amyloid-PET.(442, 443) Biomarkers of neurodegeneration, such as hippocampal atrophy, 
medial cortex thinning, low glucose uptake on fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET, or raised CSF neurofilament light 
(NFL- a non-specific marker of neurodegeneration), are more closely associated temporally with cognitive 
decline than amyloid and tau fluid biomarkers.(444) Cognitively unimpaired people who have amyloid and tau in 
the medial temporal lobe or  temporal neocortex are more likely to decline cognitively compared to people who 
have neither and, over 6 years, the risk in those that are tau positive in temporal neocortex may approach 50% 
but samples are small and estimates imprecise. (445)  Other biomarkers and progress in proteomics and 
metabolomics may uncover new pharmacological targets.(446-448) 

Blood based biomarkers. 
Since the last Lancet Commission, research has progressed into the validity of blood-based biomarkers for the 
specific diagnosis of AD in someone with dementia. It may be that blood-based biomarkers substitute for CSF or 
PET markers in determining eligibility for clinical trials and cohort studies in future and for staging the extent of 
Alzheimer-related pathology, although more evidence of validity in each specific populations of people with 
dementia is needed. Some have suggested they may be useful in future to identify people with dementia who 
do not need more invasive  or expensive investigation, either because of very low or very high probability of 
having AD. (449) The ratio of plasma Aβ42:Aβ40 using a high precision assay has a high correlation with amyloid 
PET. (450, 451) Plasma p-tau181, p-tau217, and p-tau231 have a good or better accuracy than amyloid CSF 
Abeta and tau and PET measures of tau and amyloid pathology in discriminating people with amyloid pathology 
who may have clinical symptoms.(452-454) They theoretically overcome some cost, scalability and acceptability 
limitations of PET- and CSF biomarkers with lower patient and clinician burden, through local sample collection 
with potential central quality-controlled processing, increasing access to a pathology-specific AD diagnosis.    

Clinically, they may not add value to prediction of whether people are developing Alzheimer’s dementia. A 
combination of multiple blood-based biomarkers and demographic information, like age and sex, may allow for 
determining individualised risk of developing AD dementia and this has been done in an MCI population.(455)  
Yet, when blood-based biomarkers of p181-tau + Abeta42/40 were used in France in a clinical population of 
2323 people with subjective cognitive impairment or MCI that were followed for 5 years, blood-based 
biomarkers added little to predictions of AD/mixed dementia vs no dementia, relative to a clinical model that 
used demographics and neuropsychological assessment alone. (456) Concordance (c-index) of prediction rose 
from 0.88 (0.86-0.9) to 0.90 (0.88-0.92). 

In addition, most research has been in almost exclusively White populations, with a systematic review finding 
five studies and none were in Black Africans.(457) Participants are often younger than most people with 
dementia. Small studies in African Americans report lower levels of p-tau in both cognitively normal individuals 
and people with dementia and so the generalisability of biomarkers from White populations is unclear. A 
subsequent review found seven studies and again reported lower tau levels in Black individuals with dementia, 
but none found this was explained by greater vascular burden. (458) However, a recent study of a biracial, 
community-based sample of adults found no independent association of plasma AD biomarkers based on self-
reported race, with age, sex, chronic kidney disease and vascular risk factors contributing to observed variation. 
(459)  

48 

Patient selection in AD trials: biomarker and genetic testing 
Biomarkers in AD trials 
Another development since the last Commission has been the use amyloid-PET as an eligibility criterion and as a 
surrogate clinical outcome for anti-amyloid antibody clinical trials of disease-modifying therapies for participants 
with early AD. Phase 2 and phase 3 trials of the monoclonal antibodies -- aducanumab, lecanemab, and 
donanemab, as well as the discontinued gantenerumab – that target Aβ plaques, fibrils, soluble protofibrils, and 
oligomeric Aβ species all required PET or CSF evidence of amyloid pathology for trial enrolment. (460-463) A 
phase 3 trial showed modest efficacy in slowing cognitive decline in early AD (MCI and dementia). The phase 3 
trial of donanemab, monoclonal antibody  that target Aβ plaques, fibrils, soluble protofibrils, and oligomeric Aβ 
species all targeting Aβ plaques, required people with early AD to have both positive amyloid PET and tau-PET, 
further dividing participants into low and intermediate/high positive tau burden groups.(464) Both used amyloid 
PET to assess amyloid lowering and it was a stopping criterion in the donanemab trial. Blood biomarkers could 
be used to assess whether to perform a PET scan and thus lower the cost of such trials. (465, 466)  

Genetic testing  
Knowledge about genetic testing in dementia has advanced rapidly but is not widely useful as most dementias 
are not caused by autosomal dominant genes. A positive genetic test for one of the alleles that leads to the rare 
autosomal dominant, early-onset AD increases the precision of the diagnosis and helps family members 
determine personal risk, may inform reproductive choices and can assist in clinical trials. A relatively larger 
proportion (up to a third in some estimates) of all frontotemporal dementias are due to a genetic mutation, and 
testing in the appropriate clinical setting may be important. (467) 

Genetic testing for the APOEε4 allele is not used diagnostically and many people with AD do not have it. APOE 
alleles contribute to the heterogeneity of the AD disease course. A post-mortem study  (N= 1109) found a 10% 
faster rate of cognitive decline yearly in APOEε4 carriers (−3.45 vs −3.03 MMSE points per year) and a 20% lower 
rate of decline in e2 carriers (−2.43 vs −3.03 points per year) compared to APOEε3/ε3 carriers.(468)   

APOE ε4 is an important predictor of ARIA-E and ARIA-H with treatment with anti-amyloid antibodies. 
Participants who are APOE ε4 homozygous and treated with lecanemab have a 33% incidence of vasogenic 
oedema, ARIA-E, compared to an 11% incidence in participants who are APOE ε4 heterozygous, and 5% who are 
not APOE ε4 carriers. (460) Thus, the boxed warning for lecanemab recommends APOE genotyping and patient 
counselling before treatment. Figures are similar with donanemab: 41%, 23%, and 16% incidences of ARIA-E for 
APOE ε4, homozygotes, heterozygotes, and non-carriers, respectively. 

Summary of biomarkers now and in the future 
Biomarkers look for a particular pathology not for a clinical syndrome and a biomarker is not a diagnostic test for 
dementia. Amyloid-PET is FDA approved for marketing and reimbursement, as an AD diagnostic aid, to help 
establish the presence of amyloid plaques and Alzheimer pathology.  There are clear ethical implications if used 
in people without cognitive impairment as markers of people with (asymptomatic) Alzheimer’s disease, as they 
have the potential to increase the measured rates of Alzheimer’s’ disease without there being any increase in 
people with cognitive impairment or dementia, and misidentify people who will not develop dementia 
potentially causing harm.  Currently, biomarkers should not be used alone for diagnosis to determine treatment 
as most people with positive Abeta biomarker by itself will never develop dementia. The stated hope is that if 
effective pre-symptomatic therapies are developed then accessible, cost-effective biomarkers for AD or other 
dementias may become important predicting who are likely to progress to illness and when, or as a surrogate 
endpoint for efficacy and to increase equity, but they have not reached this stage (see figure 10). (466)    

49 

Figure 10 Vision of future use of biomarkers for dementia in clinical trials. by identifying those with 
elevated risk, a condition of interest, or stratification and predictive markers; and surrogate outcome 
measures (466)  with permission. 

Interventions once a diagnosis has been made. 

Principles of intervention in people with dementia 
The progressive nature of dementia means that people living with dementia require re-assessment and the 
application of tailored approaches to address their changing care needs over time. These needs can be complex 
and include physical multimorbidity, psychological, behavioural, and cognitive symptoms and possible risks 
arising from these.  

Individualising interventions 
People with dementia are individuals, whose support and intervention needs are influenced by their own 
lifecourse, family, friendship, culture and environment as well as changing cognitive, neuropsychiatric, 
functional and physical symptoms, as we discussed in the last commission.(2)  Despite the availability of 
evidence-based practices, dementias continue to be under-detected and many individuals’ and family carers’ 
needs are unevaluated and unmet.(3)  

Published best practices for dementia care globally include managing medical problems like high BP, diabetes, 
and COPD; preventing and treating infections and delirium; environmental accommodations for safety, 
preventing falls and maintaining function; medication management including simplifying and reducing daily 
medications, for example, reducing or stopping antihypertensives if BP is falling; treatment of symptoms 
through behavioural interventions; use of  supportive and social services including assistance with activities of 
daily living, physical activity, meaningful activities, social engagement, healthy nutrition and hydration and 
addressing family carer needs. (2, 3, 469)  

Culturally appropriate or adapted interventions. 
Most interventions are developed in high-income countries (HICs). Interventions should be co-designed with 
local communities to ensure appropriateness for the context, culture, beliefs and practises which vary within 
and between countries.(470) In LMICs, dementia is often not recognised and diagnosed and, when it is, people 

50 

 
living with dementia are often faced with a lack of resources for treatment and care, including treatment of 
other illnesses and support for families. (471) The appropriateness of use of evidence-based interventions in 
LMICs can be uncertain, not only because of the lack of healthcare infrastructure and resources to deliver them, 
but also because of cultural differences that may make them inappropriate or less effective. 

Effectiveness of interventions developed in one place will vary with acceptability and feasibility in different 
populations and thus while active ingredients  should remain the same in different countries, interventions must 
be tailored in language and culture. (472) (473)  Cultural adaptation is important for psychosocial interventions 
for various mental health conditions, and meta-analyses have shown that such interventions are more effective 
than non-culturally adapted interventions. (474-476)  

A systematic review considering culturally tailored interventions for people living with dementia and family 
carers, found that culturally adapted interventions were as acceptable, feasible and effective when used in 
LMICs as in their original context as long as the interventions’ core components are not compromised in the 
process.(472)  Adaptation involves considering local cultures, needs and resources and identifying barriers and 
facilitators to their implementation. There are different opinions as to whether it is then necessary to conduct a 
full RCT in a new setting when an intervention has already been found to be effective as there may be biological, 
ethnic, cultural, and socioeconomic heterogeneity that influences treatment response and safety.(472, 477)  
Following cultural adaptation, interventions need to be tested and their components evaluated in the local 
context, to determine their acceptability and feasibility and to help define and refine the delivery characteristics 
of the intervention. It is important to include key stakeholders in the adaptation process and report the 
processes and outcomes considered. (472) Important other considerations are cultural appropriateness of 
outcome measures, many of which are developed in HICs, and scalability of the intervention.   

Multicomponent dementia care interventions 
Multicomponent dementia care models with person-centred care coordination aim to target assessment of risk 
and need for the person living with dementia and family carer using evidence‐based approaches, which may 
include neuropsychiatric symptoms and carer quality of life. (478) Individual studies of care coordination have 
shown reduced care home admission, and cost-effectiveness from a societal and individual perspective,(479) but 
a meta-analysis of 14 care coordination RCTs did not show a statistically significant reduction in care home 
admission or hospitalisation. (478) Models that include a partnership between primary and specialised care may 
lead to reduced health care costs.(480)  

Interventions for family carers 
Although some people have found joy and humour associated with dementia, caring for a family member with a 
deteriorating illness such as dementia is usually increasingly difficult. This can vary across the course of 
dementia with greater anxiety and depression at outset than later for some. A meta-analysis (43 studies, 19911 
participants) found a pooled prevalence of family carer depression of 31.2% (27.7 - 35.0).(481) There is evidence 
that some multicomponent carer interventions are effective in the short and long-term; and these usually 
include information about medical and community-based resources, skills training, stress reduction and coping 
techniques, providing emotional support and future planning. (2, 482-486) They reduce family carer depression, 
depression, burden, or stress and are cost-effective and cost saving. There is evidence that they are effective in 
Western and Asian HICs but little evidence in LMICs.(487)  They can be culturally adapted and delivered by 
trained facilitators without clinical qualifications The START (Strategies for relatives) intervention developed and 
found to be clinically and cost effective in the UK,  has been adapted for use to widen access, by making it 
culturally appropriate for Black and South Asian carers, and was successfully delivered in the third sector.(488, 

51 

489) intervention delivered by day care staff reduced carer depression at one year.(490)  A Cochrane review of 
RCT reported that remote delivery of interventions for family carers of information or support found 26 studies 
and  is not more effective than usual care. (491) A meta-analysis of internet-based psychoeducation for carers 
showed a small effect on depressive symptoms (SMD −0.19, −0.03−0.35) but not on anxiety, burden, and quality 
of life.(492) 

Interventions for cognitive symptoms 

Symptomatic treatment: Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine 
In the previous commissions we discussed cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) and memantine, the currently 
available drugs for symptomatic treatment of cognitive symptoms in AD and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
While they were initially evaluated for people with mild-to-moderate AD, meta-analyses indicate that they are 
also related to better outcomes compared to placebo in severe dementia in severity of symptoms (SMD 0.37, 
0.26–0.48; 4 studies), activities of daily living (SMD 0.15, 0.04–0.26; 5 studies) and decreased mortality 
compared to placebo (RR 0.60, 0.40–0.89; 6 studies).(493) 

Longer-term, real-world studies are now published. These include a study demonstrating that 11,652 Swedish 
propensity-matched patients with AD who took ChEIs, compared to 5,826 who did not, performed slightly and 
persistently better during mean 5-years follow-up (MMSE 0.13; 0.06–0.20 points per year better), with a dose-
response effect.(494)  A similar propensity-matched, more long term study reported larger differences between 
people who did and did not take ChEIs; in 1,572 patients with dementia, the average decrease in MMSE in those 
taking ChEIs was 5.4 points and 10.8 points in those not at the end of 13.6 years follow-up (p < 0.001).(495) 
There was a strong association between ChEIs and lower all-cause mortality (HR 0.59, 0.53–0.66). Additionally, 
in a study of 592 patients with DLB, the 100 patients who took ChEIs and 273 who took ChEIs and memantine 
had significantly lower risk of death (HR 0.67; 0.48-0.93; HR 0.64; 0.50-0.83 respectively) than 219 who took 
neither, after controlling for sociodemographic factors, physical and cognitive health, and medication use. Those 
taking ChEIs or both ChEIs and memantine had significantly less time in unplanned hospitalisation for physical 
disorders.  

These studies are observational, not randomised, and may reflect residual confounding based on willingness to 
initiate treatment so people taking ChEIs have unmeasured factors which may lead to better outcomes. Trials 
show that ChEIs do not cure or stop cognitive decline but have short-term modest positive effects and that 
stopping them is associated with worse outcomes in the longer term. Clinicians can offer these relatively 
affordable (in HICs but not LMICs), readily available, low side-effect medications for people with AD and DLB. 

Anti-amyloid antibodies for Alzheimer’s disease 
Clinical trials have investigated disease-modifying therapies (DMTs), drugs intended to affect AD pathological 
processes by targeting amyloid-β (Abeta) or tau protein, inflammatory pathways, or metabolic dysfunction,(496) 
as they may alter illness expression and progression. The hypothesis is Abeta is characteristic of AD, so amyloid-
β-targeting immunotherapy studies aim to treat those with Abeta, who are cognitively unimpaired, or have MCI 
or mild Alzheimer’s dementia. For older individuals with sporadic AD (which accounts for >95% of AD cases), it 
remains unclear how strongly early differences or longitudinal changes in AD biomarkers influence lifetime 
dementia risk or clinical progression to dementia.  

Since our last commission there have been positive trials of three anti-amyloid-β monoclonal antibodies for 
treatment of MCI due to AD and mild AD dementia in those with positive amyloid-beta biomarkers as well as 
three negative trials.  In two conflicting, identically designed phase 3 trials, aducanumab was associated with 

52 

less decline than placebo of 0.39 (0.09-0.69) Clinical Dementia Rating scale-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) points (out of 
a total possible score of 18) at 18 months in one study, and a statistically non-significant outcome favouring 
placebo in the other. (461) Lecanemab was associated with less worsening by 0.45 (0.23-0.67) CDR-SB points 
compared to placebo worsening after 18 months’ treatment and in secondary cognitive, activities of daily living, 
and compositive outcomes. (460)  Donanemab reported less worsening in integrated Alzheimer Disease Rating 
Scale (cognition and functioning) in the drug group −10.19 (−11.22 to −9.16) compared to placebo worsening 
−13.11 (−14.10 to −12.13) after 18 months’ treatment and in secondary cognitive, activities of daily living, and 
composite outcomes. (462) Since these studies were published two new studies of the subcutaneously 
administered antibody, gantenerumab  with two year follow-up have shown similar biomarker clearance with 
reduction in amyloid plaques but no statistically significant effect on CDR-SB (-0.31 and -0.19). (463) (497) The 
effects were of similar magnitude in some domains to the more positive trials but did not reach statistical 
significance. (497) Similarly a trial of solanezumab did not slow cognitive decline in people with pre-clinical 
Alzheimer’s disease, did not affect amyloid plaque level but influenced CDR-SB in line with the other studies (-
0.34). (498) (497) 

Aducanumab received FDA accelerated approval in June 2021, (499) with the post-marketing requirement to 
perform a phase 4 trial, though one such attempt has been abandoned due to low uptake. Biogen, the 
manufacturer of aducanumab have subsequently announced that they are withdrawing it from the market and 
that the phase 4 trial will be stopped. The FDA approved lecanemab in July 2023. (460) The approvals were 
based partly on the “reasonable expectation” that a reduction in amyloid- PET load, or plaques, were likely to 
predict clinical benefit, although correlations between reduction in plaques and change on clinical ratings scales 
are very weak. These antibodies have not been tested in those with moderate or severe dementia, with lowest 
score as MMSE 22 for lecanemab, and MMSE 20 for donanemab. Those in the trial needed biomarker-evidence 
of amyloid positivity, access to health facilities for biweekly intravenous treatment administration and regular 
MRI and clinical monitoring for up to 18 months, or potentially longer. 

The clinical importance of these differences is controversial.(500-503) There is excitement about positive results 
but no consensus about whether these treatments are an advance or not, or whether observed effects are 
worthwhile given the known burden, risks and costs. (504)  

Clinical implications  
In those that are effective, we do not yet know whether clinical benefits with treatment beyond 18-months will 
increase, remain steady or reduce; currently the effect remains less than that of donepezil.(505).   Adverse 
effects such as vasogenic oedema and brain haemorrhage, known as ARIA-E and ARIA-H, as well decreased brain 
volume on MRI are continuing concerns for anti-amyloid antibody treatment. Future results from open label 
extensions of trials may help answer these questions but there will be substantial dropouts and competing 
morbidity and mortality.  The small effect makes it harder to discount the potential of unblinding from adverse 
effects, These include ARIA-E (oedema or effusions) and ARIA-H (micro-haemorrhages, macro-haemorrhages 
(i.e., strokes), or superficial siderosis) in over 20% decreased brain volume on MRI are continuing concerns for 
anti-amyloid antibody treatment and infusion-related reactions, in about 26% of patients on lecanemab, and 
only 7.4% of patients on placebo. (507) (460, 461) There are ongoing safety concerns because of accelerated 
brain atrophy and deaths with amyloid plaque-lowering immunotherapies. (508, 509)  Lecanemab has a boxed 
warning for serious and symptomatic ARIA and requires testing for APOEε4 prior to initiation as homozygosity 
increases risk.(510) 

Generalisability 

53 

The stringent eligibility criteria for clinical trials of drugs for AD made study population’s health better than the 
general AD population (511) and historically excluded racial and ethnic backgrounds were under-represented, 
although there were higher numbers of minoritised groups in the lecanemab trial. Only 8% (19/237) of a 
community-based Mayo Clinic Study of Aging who had a positive amyloid-PET scan and met criteria for MCI or 
mild dementia, would have met the lecanemab trial eligibility criteria. (512)  

A meta-analysis of 101 drug trials in AD reported that 94.7% of the population were White and most excluded 
people with psychiatric illness (78%) cerebrovascular disease (68%) and cardiovascular disease (71%) and 
needed a family carer to attend infusions (80%).(513)  It is difficult to generalise findings to most people with AD 
who have high levels of multimorbidity and mixed neuropathology and to those who live in countries where 
healthcare systems could not support this level of intervention. 

Costs and provisions 

So far, the only marketing authorisation outside the US has been for lecanemab in Japan. Aducanumab, 
although freely available in the US by prescription is rarely prescribed.  In the US, Medicare and CMS will provide 
usual coverage or lecanemab and donanemab, if physicians enter patients’ data into a CMS-facilitated registry.     
(514) Lecanemab is nominally priced at $26,500 per patient per year.(515) It is unknown what price that 
Medicare, the US Veterans Administration, and private insurers will pay. In addition, there are costs for the 
many physician visits, biweekly infusions, lab tests, MRIs, and PET scans and management of side-effects. 
Medicare patients are typically required to co-pay up to 20% for all of this. The US Institute for Clinical and 
Economic Review (ICER) reported the cost-effective annual pricing was lower for lecanemab, between $8900-
21,500.(516) Treatment costs if lecanemab was available in the 27 EU countries, for those qualifying for it, at US 
pricing are estimated at 133 billion EUR per year, equivalent to over half of the total pharmaceutical 
expenditures in the EU(517) before treatment-related costs are considered. However, historically the EU and UK 
pay a fraction of the US list price for new and expensive medications.  

Summary of Disease Modifying Treatments (see Box 1) 
Finding amyloid-targeting treatments which influence cognition is an important milestone which may be the 
beginning of the development of drugs that can make a bigger difference.(518)   Effects are small in all drugs. 
(497) The resources required to support earlier biomarker-based diagnosis and supervision of administration 
and safety as well as to buy the drugs, will mean that roll-outs into many health systems will be slow or not at 
all.  If approved for this group, we recommend that they are used in research centres to find out more about 
adverse effects in more typical patients and whether the long-term effects support disease modification or not.  

Cognitive interventions for people with dementia  
We previously reported that the literature suggested that people completing cognitive interventions had 
improvements in general and specific cognitive abilities such as verbal fluency which lasted for a few months to 
one year.(2)  A 2023 Cochrane review of 25 studies using the MMSE, with 1893 participants, found that there 
was moderate-quality evidence of a clinically important difference of 1.99  (1.24-2.74) points between cognitive 
stimulation and control groups, and clinically relevant improvements in communication and social 
interaction.(519)  Improvements were larger when sessions were twice, rather than once weekly, and where 
people had mild compared to moderate dementia. 

54 

 
 
Box 1 Summary of current controversies about amyloid-targeting antibodies 
Efficacy 
Unclear if benefit is clinically meaningful. or the duration of effect 

Difficulties in implementation 
Monthly or fortnightly infusions, requiring visits to an infusion centre over a typical 18-month treatment 
period. Frequent MRIs needed for safety surveillance. Significant restructuring of existing healthcare 
infrastructure may be needed for the required physician visits, infusions, lab tests, MRIs, and PET scans and 
management of adverse effects. Lack of infrastructure in many healthcare systems that could support this 
level of intervention.  

Costs  

Lecanemab is nominally priced at $26,500 per patient per year, not including associated costs of eligibility 
screening, administration and monitoring. Historically the EU and UK pay less than US list price for new and 
expensive medications. 

Monitoring and side effects 
Regular clinical and radiological monitoring for oedema and haemorrhage that may occur in 20% of 
lecanemab patients and nearly twice that in donanemab patients.  

Exclusions 

Most existing community-based patients would not meet trial eligibility criteria. It is therefore difficult to 
generalise findings to most people with AD who are racially and ethnically diverse and have high levels of 
multimorbidity and mixed neuropathology. 

Interventions for neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia 

Exclusions 

Activity interventions 
The majority of existing community-based patients would not meet trial eligibility criteria. 508 It is therefore 
RCTs since 2018 of the tailored activity program (TAP) and other activity interventions are shown in Table 2. A 
difficult to generalise findings to most people with AD who are racially and ethnically diverse and have high 
systematic review and meta-analysis of 7 studies of the TAP interventions found a moderate effect on improving 
levels of multimorbidity and mixed neuropathology. 
quality of life (standardised ES Cohen’s d 0.79, 0.39–1.18; 7 studies, n=160) , decreasing neuropsychiatric 
symptoms (0.62; 0.40–0.83) and decreasing carer burden (0.68, 0.29–1.07).(520)  “ This  included small pilot 
trials in LMICs which showed similar effects and validate the effectiveness of the transcripts.(521) (522) They 
may also be cost saving because of lower use of healthcare systems. (523) Good quality RCTs of exercise 
interventions for people with dementia found they did not improve neuropsychiatric symptoms, cognition or 
functioning.(524, 525)  

Studies vary in the quality of evidence and design strategies, from feasibility studies and small RCTs to large 
multi-site, cluster randomized trials (Table 2).  Overall, the evidence supports earlier trials showing that different 
types of activities and being actively engaged reduced depression, neuropsychiatric symptoms and improved 
overall well-being in people with dementia and in some cases had important benefits for carers, such as saving 
time in caregiving. Successful activity-oriented interventions tend to be tailored to individual’s interests, 
preferences and abilities and involve the family carer. The scalability and implementation of tailored activity 
interventions, and the potential cost of these interventions need additional evidence with only two studies 

55 

 
 
 
 
evaluating cost effectiveness.  In contrast, RCTs of exercise as an activity did not find any mental health domain 
improvement in either community or care homes. (524-526) 

Sleep disturbance in people with dementia.  
Dysregulation of the sleep-wake cycle is common in people with dementia, due to multiple mechanisms 
including the pathophysiological processes affecting the hypothalamus and the brainstem, lack of activity and 
light, pain, anxiety and the environment. (527) A meta-analysis reported the pooled prevalence of clinically-
significant sleep disturbance in community-dwelling people with dementia to be 19% (13-25; n = 2753) and 
there has been no change in prevalence over time, suggesting treatment has not improved sleep.(528) Sleep 
disturbance was less common among people with AD (24 %, 16-33, n = 310) than DLB (49%, 37-61 n = 65). The 
prevalence was similar in a meta-analysis of care home residents (55 studies n= 22,780; 20% 16-24).(529) 

There continues to be little evidence that medication is effective. One review of nine RCTs rated to be low-
quality (530) found low-certainty evidence in a small trial (n=30) that trazadone 50 mg for two weeks may 
improve time asleep but no clear effect on other sleep parameters (MD 42.5 minutes, 0.9 -84.0). An orexin 
antagonist for four weeks in 274 people with mild-to-moderate AD increased time asleep (MD 28.2 minutes, 
11.1- 45.3) and decreased time awake after sleep onset (MD –15.7 minutes, –28.1- –3.3) without increasing 
adverse effects but did not affect number of awakenings. There was no evidence of melatonin efficacy. There 
are no RCTs of benzodiazepines or Z-drugs for sleep in people with dementia, but they may cause significant 
harms. In longitudinal primary care studies, higher dose Z-drug or benzodiazepine use (equivalent to  ≥ 7.5 mg 
zopiclone or >5 mg diazepam) in dementia was associated with increased fracture and stroke risks and so should 
be avoided for this purpose.(531) There is no conclusive evidence that non-pharmacological interventions 
improve sleep in dementia, although trials are underway.(532) 

Depression 
We described in our previous commission the evidence that antidepressants are no more effective than placebo 
for depression in people with dementia.(2)  People in both groups improve and it can be argued that drug 
treatments are held to a higher standard than non-drug interventions when the non-intervention group usually 
receives treatment as usual. It is likely that for many people, depression in dementia differs from depression in 
those without dementia as brain changes in dementia, which vary between different subtypes of dementia, may 
mean that antidepressants which are effective in depression without dementia do not work. (533) A Cochrane 
review of RCTs of psychological treatments for depression and anxiety in MCI or dementia  found what they 
labelled CBT-based treatments (four CBT,  eight behavioural activation and two problem solving therapy) added 
to usual care for people with dementia or MCI and depressive symptoms or depressive diagnosis had a large 
effect (SMD ‐0.84, ‐1.14 - ‐0.54; I² = 24%; 4 studies- 3 of which were problem solving therapies, 194 participants)  
but there was little or no effect for those without depressive symptoms or diagnosis at baseline. (534)  
Supportive and counselling treatments were not effective.  

Psychosis 

Aetiology 
Psychosis can precede dementia and as discussed in the risk section; very late onset schizophrenia may be a 
dementia prodrome. (535) Psychotic symptoms in dementia are associated with a particular tauopathy and 
neocortical synaptic disruption but it is not known if these are causal.(535) There is also a modest association 
between psychosis in AD and APOEε4, which does not account for all of the risk.(536)  

56 

Management 
We previously discussed how comprehensive clinical assessment is essential in suspected psychosis in dementia, 
as misremembering experienced by individuals with dementia is distinct from delusions, and new psychotic 
symptoms may be due to delirium.(1)   

If a person with dementia is not distressed by psychosis, they may not require treatment. Management should 
continue to start with non-pharmacological interventions, to maximise stimulation such as improving hearing 
and sight and increasing social and other stimulation.  

ChEIs have a minute effect on improving psychosis in AD with a meta-analysis of IPD from 12 RCTs of ChEIs for 
psychotic symptoms as secondary outcomes in AD  (delusions −0.08, −0.14 - −0.03, I2=0;  hallucinations 0.09, 
−0.14- −0.04; I2=0, n= 5580). (537)  Caveats remain about any antipsychotic use, which include increased 
dementia-specific mortality, and these may be appropriate for those whose psychosis creates distress or 
functional impairment and should be prescribed in as low a dose and for the shortest time possible. Meta-
analyses find risperidone and aripiprazole are the antipsychotics with the best evidence, with evidence that 
there is less risk of stroke with risperidone for delusions than other indications. (535) (2) 

An RCT of pimavanserin (an atypical antipsychotic with selective serotonin 5-HT2a inverse agonist effect) 
withdrawal in dementia-related psychosis was stopped early due to lower rates of relapse in the treatment 
versus placebo groups, which appeared to be driven by effects in people with Parkinson’s disease.(538) A US 
retrospective cohort study comparing pimavanserin (n=3227) with atypical antipsychotics (n=18442) in 
Parkinson’s disease with or without dementia, found a 35% lower mortality rate in those treated with 
pimavanserin(539). An earlier RCT of efficacy in AD psychosis showed differences favouring pimavanserin at 
week 6 but not at 2, 4, 9 or 12 weeks.(540)  Pimavanserin is approved as a treatment for psychosis in Parkinson’s 
disease, but the FDA rejected it for treatment in AD.  

Agitation 
We have previously, and still recommend, an approach for the comprehensive assessment and management of 
agitation in dementia, which is common, heterogenous, distressing and associated with increased carer burden 
and costs of care.(1) Immediate action requires assessment of underlying reasons for agitation, such as pain and 
distress and management of these before using medication.  

Certain antipsychotics, such as risperidone, are licensed in UK, Australia, Canada and EU for treating agitation in 
dementia. In May 2023, brexpiprazole became the first antipsychotic to obtain US FDA marketing approval for 
treating agitation in AD but does not afford better efficacy or safety than other atypical antipsychotic drugs for 
this indication.(541, 542) (543) A phase 3 study (N=433) showed that treatment with brexpiprazole 2mg per day 
for agitation in AD was associated with an improvement of -3.77 Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) 
points versus placebo at 12 weeks.(542) The most recent larger 12-week phase 3 RCT of brexpiprazole 2-3mg 
per day for agitation in AD (n=345) reported an improvement of -5.3 CMAI points compared to placebo. (544)  In 
comparison, a pooled analysis of RCTs of risperidone that used the CMAI (n=1150) showed a mean dose of 
1mg/day was associated with an improvement of -5.4 CMAI points at 12 weeks.(545) The main concern with 
antipsychotic drugs in dementia is increased risk for cardiovascular adverse events and mortality.(546)  
Brexpiprazole treatment was associated with numerically more deaths compared to placebo (6 versus 1). 
Risperidone remains the atypical antipsychotic with the largest RCT evidence base in the treatment of agitation.  
These medications should only be used after a thorough assessment and management of underlying causes of 
agitation, a trial of non-pharmacologic strategies with careful consideration and after potential risks have been 
shared and discussed with the person with dementia and their family carers depending on capacity. 

57 

Hospital admissions and delirium 
Delirium is common, under-recognised and under-treated in older people and occurs in people who are more 
cognitively impaired prior to an acute illness.(547) In the last Lancet commission, we discussed how delirium and 
dementia frequently occur together but there is no definitive evidence that any medication improves delirium; 
sedating benzodiazepines are ineffective and like antipsychotics, are associated with increased mortality and 
morbidity.(2)  

Delirium superimposed on dementia is associated with longer length of hospitalisation, worse cognitive and 
functional outcomes, and a higher risk of care home admission and mortality.(548) A recent meta-analysis found 
that delirium was significantly associated with  future cognitive decline (ES Hedges g 0.45; 0.34-0.57).(549)  In a 
London study quantifying this, 209/1510 (13.6%) participants in a prospective cohort with median age 77 years, 
were admitted to hospital at least once over a follow-up of 30 months or more. (550) Those who were more 
cognitively impaired were more likely to be admitted and both more likely to develop delirium and the delirium 
was more severe than their comparators. Cognitive impairment is a risk factor for delirium which is a risk factor 
for further cognitive deterioration and functional decline.(551)  

It is important to energetically treat delirium, both treating the underlying illness and using non-pharmacological 
means of increasing orientation, vision and hearing maximisation, management of pain and hypoxia, fluid 
support and ensuring food intake. In addition, it is essential to monitor the health of people discharged from 
hospital with delirium. They are often cognitively impaired or have dementia and cannot be expected to initiate 
and work on a treatment plan at home without help. Preventing and treating delirium in those without 
dementia might decrease dementia risk but currently we cannot be sure.(552) 

Lessons learned from COVID-19 and dementia. 
COVID-19 by itself and the associated social isolation and lockdown has had a significant, disproportionate, 
negative impact on symptoms and mortality of people with dementia and on their families, and carers.(553)  
People with dementia had around five times the mortality from COVID-19 (meta-analysis of 10 studies OR 5.17, 
2.31- 11.59; n=119,218)  compared to those without dementia (554)  A systematic review of the effects of social 
isolation in COVID-19 found 9/15 (60%) studies with 6,442 participants reported worse than expected 
deterioration in cognition and 14/15 (93%) worsening or new onset of non-cognitive symptoms. (555)  

Care home residents usually need personal care, and thus cannot be isolated from staff.  Family were frequently 
restricted or forbidden to visit during the pandemic to contain risk, thus leaving people isolated.(553, 556)  
Larger care homes, those who used more agency staff, transferred staff between settings, tested less for COVID-
19  and had less access to personal protective equipment (PPE) had higher levels of infection and mortality.(557)  

Long term lessons about pandemics and end-of-life management for people with dementia 
Longer term lessons for other pandemics include policy ensuring that people are not admitted to a care home 
when their infection status is positive or unknown, as this exposes people who have no say in it to danger. We 
now know the positive impact of care homes restricting movement of staff between homes and ensuring staff 
have priority access to and wear PPE to reduce infection. People with dementia require access to care which is 
appropriate for them, and it is impossible to completely isolate people who need 24-hour care.  

People with dementia should be encouraged to make legal decisions about what they want while they have 
capacity to make these decisions. As we discussed in detail in the last commission, people with dementia have 
other illnesses and die earlier. (2) They or another decision-maker like a family member, if they do not have 
capacity to make decisions, should decide about possible curative and palliative care, rather than blanket 

58 

decisions being made for people with dementia. People with dementia should have the same access to palliative 
care as the remainder of the population. 

Technology and delivery of interventions  
Technology has several potential roles in dementia management, including in diagnosis and assessment, 
monitoring to promote safety, assistance in activities of daily living and cognition, facilitating social interaction 
and leisure activities, and supporting family carers.(558) There is a dearth of high-quality research on emerging 
technologies, due to novelty and a rapidly evolving field, meaning that evidence for their use is often lacking. 

Monitoring symptoms 
Technologies to assess dementia symptoms have limited evidence. A review of 14 studies of sensing 
technologies for dementia symptoms showed that, in 7 studies, actigraphy correlated with agitation and 
aggression in people with dementia, but there was a lack of evidence for other technologies .(559) A review of 
55 studies of assessments of sleep quality in dementia found no benefit of actigraphy in five studies, compared 
to questionnaire-based instruments. (529) 

Technological interventions 
A scoping review indicated that smart-home technologies, which are appliances and devices in the home 
connected via the internet to enhance the living environment, are not ready for implementation for people with 
dementia, and that there was not clear evidence of efficacy .(560) An RCT in 495 people with dementia of 
assistive technology and telecare recommended by a health or social care professional to meet assessed needs 
was not better than a basic package of safety-related devices in length of time that participants remained in the 
community, carer burden, depression or anxiety, health and social care or societal costs and quality-adjusted 
life-years. (561) In a systematic review of 66 studies, socially assistive robots were generally feasible and 
acceptable to people with dementia and their carers, and to healthcare professionals, but there was no evidence 
of effect on cognition, neuropsychiatric symptoms, or quality of life. (562) 

Summary of technology in dementia 
In general, there is a lack of evidence to recommend specific technologies for dementia management. 
Technologies should, where possible, supplement rather than replace existing care leading to harmful social 
isolation. There is concern that future technology may reduce equity by being less accessible to those with less 
financial resources.  

Conclusions 
The number of people living with dementia is going to increase in all countries and policy makers should 
prioritise resources to enable risk reduction and to help people with dementia and their families.  There is much 
more evidence that interventions can help retain cognition and prevent dementia. These should be targeted at 
those who need them most.   

The prevention approach should be directed at addressing midlife risk factor levels early enough (the earlier, the 
better) and maintaining them low throughout life (the longer, the better). Key individual interventions are 
preventing and treating hearing loss, treating vision loss and depression; cognitive stimulation throughout life, 
decreasing smoking, reducing and treating vascular risk factors (cholesterol, diabetes, obesity, blood pressure), 
reduce head injury, maintaining and encouraging physical activity. Policy changes can reduce air pollution, salt 
and sugar in food thus targeting obesity, hypertension and diabetes and make structural changes to increase 
exercise and reduce social isolation. There is still an effect of changing the risk throughout life. “It’s never too 
early to start and never too late to start”.  

59 

Much can be done for people with dementia and their families, but in many countries, it is not available or a 
priority. Good quality diagnosis, care planning and tailored post-diagnostic support enables the prevention of 
harm, treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms, and protection of quality of life for people with dementia and 
their family carers. We have interventions that work, but do not deliver them at scale to everyone that would 
benefit from them.  

We have a long-awaited scientific breakthrough with some modestly positive (and some negative) results for 
potentially disease modifying drugs, but the clinical implications are still unclear.  There is exciting progress in 
biomarkers but by themselves they are not enough to justify diagnosis. Clinically should be used only to help 
classify whether people with dementia have Alzheimer’s.  Drug and psychosocial treatment are progressing.  It is 
even more important therefore that we make things better for people with dementia and their families.  

Conflict of interest 
SA declares grants from ICMR: Indian Council for Medical Research (2022-2025),  GOK: Government of 
Karnataka (2022-2023), RBM: Rotary Bangalore Midtown (2022-2023), LSIPL: M/s Lowes Services India Private 
Limited (2022-2025), Wellcome Trust, UK (2023-2026); Honoria received by International Neuropsychological 
Society, Honoria received by Indian Council of Medical research, Honoria received by Ashoka University, Honoria 
received by Indian Council of Medical research; Payment for expert testimony Received by Indian Council of 
Medical research , Received by Ashoka University, Received by Indian Council of Medical research. Travel grant 
paid by UCL, UK for being part of the Lancet commission. 

SB declares grants from NIHR, ESRC, EPSRC, CIHR, Alzheimer’s Association, Alzheimer’s Society, Health Education 
England, Director of Somerset NHS Foundation Trust, Alzheimer’s Society, Trustee University of Plymouth, 
Executive Dean, University of Nottingham Pro-Vice Chancellor. 

AB acts as a consultant for Lilly, Taurx pharmaceuticals and Eisai. He also carries out medico legal work for 
solicitors.   

NF declares consulting fees from F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Eli Lilly, Ionis, Biogen, Siemens, Participation in data 
safety monitoring or advisory Board Biogen. Alzheimer’s Society - Member of Research Strategy Council 

LNG declares TAP licenses.  

MK declares grants from Wellcome Trust (221854/Z/20/Z), Medical Research Council (R024227), National 
Institute on Aging (R01AG062553, R01AG056477) and Academy of Finland, Finland (350426). 

KL declared fellowship from Medical Research Council 

EBL receives grants from NIH and royalties from UpToDate 

GL declares support for manuscript Alzheimer’s society, Alzheimer’s Society UK, UKRI, Alzheimer’s Society- 
Member of Research Strategy Council Nightingale Hammerson -Trustee 

KR declares grants from CIHR, Canadian Frailty Network, Research Nova Scotia; royalties from Biotest AG; Qu 
Biologics Inc; AstraZeneca UK Limited; BioAge Labs, Inc;, Congenica; Icosavax, Inc; KCR S.A.; Faraday 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc; Synairgen Research Ltd; Enanta Pharmaceuticals;Pfizer Inc; Boehringer Ingelheim 
International GmbH; Fresenius Kabi Deutschland GmbH; Baycrest Geriatric Care; Shanghai Ark 
Biopharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Payment or honoraria from UBC, Fraser Health Authority, McMaster U, Chinese 
Medical Association, Wake Forest University Medical School Centre, University of Omaha, Atria Institute, 

60 

participation on data safety/advisory board EpiPharma Inc. leadership on Canadian Consortium on 
Neurodegeneration in Dementia,  Cap Breton University, Nova Scotia Health 

KS declares support from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) fund, 22H03352, 21KK0168, 
16KK0059. 

LS declares support from Della Martin Foundation, NIH P30 AG066530, NIH R01 AG051346, NIH R01 AG062687, 
NIH R01 AG051346, NIH R01 AG055444, NIH P01 AG02350, NIH R01 AG053267,  NIH R01 AG074983, NIH R01 
AG063826., Biohaven, Biogen, Eisai. Eli Lilly and consulting fees from AC Immune, Cortexyme, Alpha-cognitio, 
BioVie, Athira,   Eli Lilly/Avid, Corium, Lundbeck, Merck, Novo-Nordisk, Neurim Ltd, Otsuka, Roche/Genentech, 
Cognition, Lighthouse, GW Research, ImmunoBrain Lid, Bristol Myers Squibb 

ATS declares grants from Wellcome Trust, Alzheimer’s Association, Brain Canada, National Institute for Health 
Research 

YY declares support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (72374013) and National Key R&D 
Program of China (2023YFB4603200, 2023YFC3606400). 

SW declares NIHR doctoral training fellowship. 

All other authors declare no conflict of interest.  

Contributors 
GL wrote the first draft of the whole paper and revisions of drafts.  All authors contributed to sections of the 
report, and all revised the paper for important intellectual content. SC, AS and GL conceptualised and performed 
new meta-analyses. GL, NM, GS and AS conceived the new PAF calculation and defined variables. GL and NM 
updated prevalence and RR for the PAF.  NM carried out the analysis for weighted PAF.  GL, SC, AS, JH, NM, KL, 
SA, DA, SB, NCF, CPF, LG, RH, HCK, MK, EBL, NN, KR, QS, KS, AS-M, LS, YY and SW attended the conference to 
discuss the content.  

Acknowledgments  
We are partnered by University College London who provided rooms and logistic support and was supported by 
the UCLH NIHR BRC and the Alzheimer’s Society, UK, the Economic and Social Research Council, and Alzheimer’s 
Research UK, and would like to thank them for financial help. These organisations funded the fares, 
accommodation, and food for the Commission meeting but had no role analysis, or interpretation or writing of 
the manuscript or the decision to submit it for publication. We would like to thank Seema Duggal from 
University College London, London, for her administrative help, including managing finances, booking rooms and 
food. The work o We would like to thank HUNT Research Centre (NTNU), with Arnulf Langhammer, Jørn Søberg 
Fenstad, and Håvard Horndalen Tveit, for their work in defining risk factors, extracting, and processing their data 
to provide us with figures on communality. We would like to acknowledge the contribution of Ruan- Ching Yu 
(UCL) on the hearing systematic review and meta-analysis Cecilia S. Lee on vision and Lindesay Wallace on public 
health.  

Livingston G, Sommerlad A, Orgeta V, Costafreda SG, Huntley J, Ames D, et al. Dementia prevention, 

References 
1. 
intervention, and care. Lancet. 2017;390(10113):2673-734. 
2. 
intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet. 2020;396(10248):413-46. 

Livingston G, Huntley J, Sommerlad A, Ames D, Ballard C, Banerjee S, et al. Dementia prevention, 

61 

Feigin VL, Vos T, Nichols E, Owolabi MO, Carroll WM, Dichgans M, et al. The global burden of 

Collaborators GBDDF. Estimation of the global prevalence of dementia in 2019 and forecasted 

Organization WH. Global Health Observatory: Dementia standards, guidelines and protocols 2023 

Knapp M, Lorenz-Dant K, Walbaum M, Comas-Herrera A, Cyhlarova E, Livingston G, Wittenberg R. 

[NG97] Ng. Dementia: assessment, management and support for people living with dementia and their 

3. 
[Available from: https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/global-dementia-observatory-gdo/diagnosis-
treatment-and-care/dementia-standards-guidelines-protocols. 
4. 
prevalence in 2050: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Public Health. 
2022;7(2):e105-e25. 
5. 
neurological disorders: translating evidence into policy. Lancet Neurol. 2020;19(3):255-65. 
6. 
Maestre G, Carrillo M, Kalaria R, Acosta D, Adams L, Adoukonou T, et al. The Nairobi Declaration-
Reducing the burden of dementia in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs): Declaration of the 2022 
Symposium on Dementia and Brain Aging in LMICs. Alzheimers Dement. 2023. 
Mukadam N, Anderson R, Knapp M, Wittenberg R, Karagiannidou M, Costafreda SG, et al. Effective 
7. 
interventions for potentially modifiable risk factors for late-onset dementia: a costs and cost-effectiveness 
modelling study. Lancet Health Longev. 2020;1(1):E13-E20. 
8. 
Guterman EL, Kiekhofer RE, Wood AJ, Allen IE, Kahn JG, Dulaney S, et al. Care Ecosystem Collaborative 
Model and Health Care Costs in Medicare Beneficiaries With Dementia A Secondary Analysis of a Randomized 
Clinical Trial. Jama Intern Med. 2023. 
9. 
Scaling-up an evidence-based intervention for family carers of people with dementia: Current and future costs 
and outcomes. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2024;39(2):e6059. 
10. 
carers. 2018. 
James T, Mukadam N, Sommerlad A, Pour HR, Knowles M, Azocar I, Livingston G. Protection against 
11. 
discrimination in national dementia guideline recommendations: A systematic review. Plos Med. 2022;19(1). 
12. 
of dementia: an individual patient data meta-analysis. Eur Heart J. 2022. 
13. 
Incident Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia. JAMA Psychiatry. 2022;79(12):1180-7. 
14. 
dementia: Analysis of individual-level data from 1.3 million individuals. Alzheimers Dement. 2018;14(5):601-9. 
15.  Wolters FJ, Chibnik LB, Waziry R, Anderson R, Berr C, Beiser A, et al. Twenty-seven-year time trends in 
dementia incidence in Europe and the United States: The Alzheimer Cohorts Consortium. Neurology. 
2020;95(5):e519-e31. 
16. 
Brunner,E.J. Dementia incidence trend in England and Wales, 2002–19, and projection for dementia burden to 
2040: analysis of data from the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing. The Lancet Public Health. 2023;8(11):e859-
e67. 
17. 
Lancet Public Health. 2023;8(11):e830-e1. 
18. 
and Wales? Lancet Public Health. 2024;9(3):e152-e3. 
19. 
with and without Alzheimer's dementia: population based cohort study. Bmj-Brit Med J. 2022;377. 
20. 
occurrence of neuropathology in old age: harmonisation of 12 measures across six community-based autopsy 
studies of dementia. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2023;4(3):e115-e25. 
21.  Wallace LMK, Theou O, Darvesh S, Bennett DA, Buchman AS, Andrew MK, et al. Neuropathologic burden 
and the degree of frailty in relation to global cognition and dementia. Neurology. 2020;95(24):E3269-E79. 

Peters R, Xu Y, Fitzgerald O, Aung HL, Beckett N, Bulpitt C, et al. Blood pressure lowering and prevention 

Ahmadi-Abhari S, Kivimaki M. Do age-standardised dementia incidence rates really increase in England 

Dhana K, Franco OH, Ritz EM, Ford CN, Desai P, Krueger KR, et al. Healthy lifestyle and life expectancy 

Nichols E, Lee J. Updating estimated trends in dementia incidence: evidence of increases in England. 

Chen YB, P. Stoye, G. Liu, Y. Wu,Y. Lobanov-Rostovsky, S. French, E. Kivimaki, M. Livingston,G. Liao,J. 

Kivimaki M, Luukkonen R, Batty GD, Ferrie JE, Pentti J, Nyberg ST, et al. Body mass index and risk of 

Nichols E, Merrick R, Hay SI, Himali D, Himali JJ, Hunter S, et al. The prevalence, correlation, and co-

Guo J, Wang J, Dove A, Chen H, Yuan C, Bennett DA, Xu W. Body Mass Index Trajectories Preceding 

62 

Grodstein F, Leurgans SE, Capuano AW, Schneider JA, Bennett DA. Trends in Postmortem 

Ngandu T, Lehtisalo J, Korkki S, Solomon A, Coley N, Antikainen R, et al. The effect of adherence on 

Hadjichrysanthou C, Evans S, Bajaj S, Siakallis LC, McRae-McKee K, de Wolf F, et al. The dynamics of 

Amidei CB, Fayosse A, Dumurgier J, Machado-Fragua MD, Tabak AG, van Sloten T, et al. Association 

Guo J, Brickman AM, Manly JJ, Reitz C, Schupf N, Mayeux RP, Gu Y. Association of Life's Simple 7 with 

Song S, Stern Y, Gu Y. Modifiable lifestyle factors and cognitive reserve: A systematic review of current 

Anaturk M, Kaufmann T, Cole JH, Suri S, Griffanti L, Zsoldos E, et al. Prediction of brain age and cognitive 

22. 
Neurodegenerative and Cerebrovascular Neuropathologies Over 25 Years. JAMA Neurol. 2023. 
23. 
evidence. Ageing Res Rev. 2022;74:101551. 
24. 
age: Quantifying brain and cognitive maintenance in aging. Hum Brain Mapp. 2021;42(6):1626-40. 
25. 
biomarkers across the clinical spectrum of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2020;12(1):74. 
26. 
cognition in a multidomain lifestyle intervention (FINGER). Alzheimers Dement. 2022;18(7):1325-34. 
27. 
Coley N, Ngandu T, Lehtisalo J, Soininen H, Vellas B, Richard E, et al. Adherence to multidomain 
interventions for dementia prevention: Data from the FINGER and MAPT trials. Alzheimers & Dementia. 
2019;15(6):729-41. 
28. 
incident dementia and its modification by the apolipoprotein E genotype. Alzheimers & Dementia. 
2021;17(12):1905-13. 
29. 
Between Age at Diabetes Onset and Subsequent Risk of Dementia. Jama-J Am Med Assoc. 2021;325(16):1640-9. 
30. 
Rohr S, Pabst A, Baber R, Engel C, Glaesmer H, Hinz A, et al. Social determinants and lifestyle factors for 
brain health: implications for risk reduction of cognitive decline and dementia. Sci Rep. 2022;12(1):12965. 
31. 
Ribeiro F, Teixeira-Santos AC, Caramelli P, Leist AK. Prevalence of dementia in Latin America and 
Caribbean countries: Systematic review and meta-analyses exploring age, sex, rurality, and education as possible 
determinants. Ageing Research Reviews. 2022;81. 
32. 
global challenges in health and aging. Nature Aging. 2022;2(9):775-83. 
33. 
Risk Factors for Dementia to Evaluate the Quantity, Quality, and Global Representativeness of Evidence. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2019;70:S165-S86. 
34. 
Retention of Older Adults Participants from Underrepresented Minorities in Alzheimer's Disease Research. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2021;80(3):927-40. 
35. 
worldwide previous and ongoing studies for research on health in ageing. European journal of Ageing. 
2006;3:41-59. 
36. 
dementia in low-income and middle-income countries: an analysis using cross-sectional survey data. Lancet Glob 
Health. 2019;7(5):e596-e603. 
37. 
a UK population-based comparison of cardiovascular disease and diabetes in people of European, Indian Asian 
and African Caribbean origins. International journal of epidemiology. 2012;41(1):33-42. 
38. 
Adelman S, Blanchard M, Rait G, Leavey G, Livingston G. Prevalence of dementia in African-Caribbean 
compared with UK-born White older people: two-stage cross-sectional study. Br J Psychiatry. 2011;199(2):119-
25. 
39. 
prevention between major ethnic groups within one country: A cross sectional analysis of population 
attributable fraction of potentially modifiable risk factors in New Zealand. Lancet Reg Health-W. 2021;13. 

Anstey KJ, Ee N, Eramudugolla R, Jagger C, Peters R. A Systematic Review of Meta-Analyses that Evaluate 

Seematter-Bagnoud L, Santos-Eggimann B. Population-based cohorts of the 50s and over: a summary of 

Tillin T, Forouhi NG, McKeigue PM, Chaturvedi N. Southall And Brent REvisited: Cohort profile of SABRE, 

Mukadam N, Sommerlad A, Huntley J, Livingston G. Population attributable fractions for risk factors for 

Indorewalla KK, O'Connor MK, Budson AE, Guess C, Jackson J. Modifiable Barriers for Recruitment and 

Brayne C, Moffitt TE. The limitations of large-scale volunteer databases to address inequalities and 

Ma'u E, Cullum S, Cheung G, Livingston G, Mukadam N. Differences in the potential for dementia 

63 

Jütten LH, Mark RE, Wicherts JM, Sitskoorn MM. The Effectiveness of Psychosocial and Behavioral 

Mukadam N, Marston L, Lewis G, Mathur R, Lowther E, Rait G, Livingston G. South Asian, Black and 

Manly JJ, Jones RN, Langa KM, Ryan LH, Levine DA, McCammon R, et al. Estimating the Prevalence of 

See RS, Thompson F, Russell S, Quigley R, Esterman A, Harriss LR, et al. Potentially modifiable dementia 
40. 
risk factors in all Australians and within population groups: an analysis using cross-sectional survey data. Lancet 
Public Health. 2023;8(9):e717-e25. 
41. 
Lee M, Whitsel E, Avery C, Hughes TM, Griswold ME, Sedaghat S, et al. Variation in Population 
Attributable Fraction of Dementia Associated With Potentially Modifiable Risk Factors by Race and Ethnicity in 
the US. Jama Netw Open. 2022;5(7). 
42. 
Dementia and Mild Cognitive Impairment in the US: The 2016 Health and Retirement Study Harmonized 
Cognitive Assessment Protocol Project. JAMA Neurol. 2022;79(12):1242-9. 
43. 
Godard-Sebillotte C, Le Berre M, Schuster T, Trottier M, Vedel I. Impact of health service interventions 
on acute hospital use in community-dwelling persons with dementia: A systematic literature review and meta-
analysis. PLoS One. 2019;14(6):e0218426. 
44. 
Brooks D, Fielding E, Beattie E, Edwards H, Hines S. Effectiveness of psychosocial interventions on the 
psychological health and emotional well-being of family carers of people with dementia following residential 
care placement: a systematic review. JBI Database System Rev Implement Rep. 2018;16(5):1240-68. 
45. 
Interventions for Informal Dementia Caregivers: Meta-Analyses and Meta-Regressions. J Alzheimers Dis. 
2018;66(1):149-72. 
46. 
Eastwood SV, Tillin T, Chaturvedi N, Hughes AD. Ethnic Differences in Associations Between Blood 
Pressure and Stroke in South Asian and European Men : Novelty and Significance. Hypertension. 2015;66(3):481-
8. 
47. 
White ethnicity and the effect of potentially modifiable risk factors for dementia: A study in English electronic 
health records. PLoS One. 2023;18(10):e0289893. 
48. 
Brazil: Differences by region and race. Alzheimers Dement. 2022. 
49. 
managing multiple high-burden chronic diseases in older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ. 
2018;190(34):E1004-E12. 
50. 
Specific Mortality Risk in the United States. Jama Netw Open. 2022;5(5). 
51. 
obesity in India. Jama Netw Open. 2019;2(4):e190411-e. 
52. 
Socioeconomic Spectrum. Jama Netw Open. 2019;2(4):e190404. 
53. 
Scientific Reports. 2023;13(1):80. 
54. 
Explain Sex Differences in Dementia Incidence and Prevalence? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2023;91(4):1231-41. 
55. 
Gong J, Harris K, Lipnicki DM, Castro-Costa E, Lima-Costa MF, Diniz BS, et al. Sex differences in dementia 
risk and risk factors: Individual-participant data analysis using 21 cohorts across six continents from the COSMIC 
consortium. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2023. 
56. 
Lee DA, Tirlea L, Haines TP. Non-pharmacological interventions to prevent hospital or nursing home 
admissions among community-dwelling older people with dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Health Soc Care Community. 2020;28(5):1408-29. 

Geraets AF, Leist AK. Sex/gender and socioeconomic differences in modifiable risk factors for dementia. 

Huque H, Eramudugolla R, Chidiac B, Ee N, Ehrenfeld L, Matthews FE, et al. Could Country-Level Factors 

Suemoto CK, Mukadam N, Brucki SMD, Caramelli P, Nitrini R, Laks J, et al. Risk factors for dementia in 

Boing AF, deSouza P, Boing AC, Kim R, Subramanian SV. Air Pollution, Socioeconomic Status, and Age-

Patel SA, Cunningham SA, Tandon N, Narayan KMV. Chronic Diseases in India-Ubiquitous Across the 

Kastner M, Cardoso R, Lai Y, Treister V, Hamid JS, Hayden L, et al. Effectiveness of interventions for 

Corsi DJ, Subramanian S. Socioeconomic gradients and distribution of diabetes, hypertension, and 

64 

Liu H, Hsieh N, Zhang Z, Zhang Y, Langa KM. Same-Sex Couples and Cognitive Impairment: Evidence From 

Toews I, Anglemyer A, Nyirenda JL, Alsaid D, Balduzzi S, Grummich K, et al. Healthcare outcomes 

Teahan Á, Lafferty A, McAuliffe E, Phelan A, O'Sullivan L, O'Shea D, et al. Psychosocial Interventions for 

Okamoto S, Kobayashi E, Murayama H, Liang J, Fukaya T, Shinkai S. Decomposition of gender differences 

57. 
Family Carers of People With Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Aging Health. 
2020;32(9):1198-213. 
58. 
in cognitive functioning: National Survey of the Japanese elderly. BMC Geriatr. 2021;21(1):38. 
59. 
Bloomberg M, Dugravot A, Dumurgier J, Kivimaki M, Fayosse A, Steptoe A, et al. Sex differences and the 
role of education in cognitive ageing: analysis of two UK-based prospective cohort studies. Lancet Public Health. 
2021;6(2):e106-e15. 
60. 
Bloomberg M, Dugravot A, Sommerlad A, Kivimaki M, Singh-Manoux A, Sabia S. Comparison of sex 
differences in cognitive function in older adults between high- and middle-income countries and the role of 
education: a population-based multicohort study. Age Ageing. 2023;52(2). 
Mielke MM, Aggarwal NT, Vila-Castelar C, Agarwal P, Arenaza-Urquijo EM, Brett B, et al. Consideration 
61. 
of sex and gender in Alzheimer's disease and related disorders from a global perspective. Alzheimers Dement. 
2022;18(12):2707-24. 
62. 
the Health and Retirement Study. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2021;76(7):1388-99. 
63. 
Brady B, Zheng L, Kootar S, Anstey KJ. Sex and gender differences in risk scores for dementia and 
Alzheimer's disease among cisgender, transgender, and non-binary adults. Alzheimers Dement. 2024;20(1):5-15. 
64. 
Lindhout JE, van Dalen JW, van Gool WA, Richard E. The challenge of dementia prevention trials and the 
role of quasi-experimental studies. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2023. 
65. 
assessed with observational study designs compared with those assessed in randomized trials: a meta-
epidemiological study. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2024;1(1):MR000034. 
66. 
Commission risk factors for dementia using Mendelian randomisation. BMJ Ment Health. 2023;26(1). 
67. 
Thomassen JQ, Tolstrup JS, Benn M, Frikke-Schmidt R. Type-2 diabetes and risk of dementia: 
observational and Mendelian randomisation studies in 1 million individuals. Epidemiol Psych Sci. 2020;29. 
68. 
Liu C, Murchland AR, VanderWeele TJ, Blacker D. Eliminating racial disparities in dementia risk by 
equalizing education quality: A sensitivity analysis. Soc Sci Med. 2022;312. 
69. 
Systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal cohort studies. Ageing Res Rev. 2020;58:101005. 
70. 
Affect Dementia Risk When Adult Socioeconomic Status Is Not Altered? A Swedish Natural Experiment in 1.3 
Million Individuals. Am J Epidemiol. 2021;190(5):817-26. 
71. 
Chinese population over two decades: The role of education. Alzheimers Dement. 2020;16(12):1650-62. 
72. 
Attainment for Dementia Prevalence Trends From 2000 to 2014, Among Older Non-Hispanic Black and White 
Americans. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2021;76(9):1870-9. 
73. 
Dementia Incidence Stratified by Ethnicity and Nativity in a Cohort of Older Asian American Individuals. Jama 
Netw Open. 2023;6(3):e231661. 
74. 
Kivimaki M, Walker KA, Pentti J, Nyberg ST, Mars N, Vahtera J, et al. Cognitive stimulation in the 
workplace, plasma proteins, and risk of dementia: three analyses of population cohort studies. Bmj-Brit Med J. 
2021;374. 
75. 
and Incident Dementia: A COSMIC Collaborative Cohort Study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;85(1):179-96. 

Hayes-Larson E, Ikesu R, Fong J, Mobley TM, Gee GC, Brookmeyer R, et al. Association of Education With 

Hyun J, Hall CB, Katz MJ, Derby CA, Lipnicki DM, Crawford JD, et al. Education, Occupational Complexity, 

Ding D, Zhao Q, Wu W, Xiao Z, Liang X, Luo J, Hong Z. Prevalence and incidence of dementia in an older 

Seblova D, Fischer M, Fors S, Johnell K, Karlsson M, Nilsson T, et al. Does Prolonged Education Causally 

Desai R, John A, Saunders R, Marchant NL, Buckman JEJ, Charlesworth G, et al. Examining the Lancet 

Hayward MD, Farina MP, Zhang YS, Kim JK, Crimmins EM. The Importance of Improving Educational 

Seblova D, Berggren R, Lovden M. Education and age-related decline in cognitive performance: 

65 

Barro RJ, Lee JW. A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950–2010. Journal of 

Gavelin HM, Lampit A, Hallock H, Sabates J, Bahar-Fuchs A. Cognition-Oriented Treatments for Older 

Avila JF, Renteria MA, Jones RN, Vonk JMJ, Turney I, Sol K, et al. Education differentially contributes to 

Kim Y, Kim SW, Seo SW, Jang H, Kim KW, Cho SH, et al. Effect of education on functional network edge 

Gates NJ, Rutjes AW, Di Nisio M, Karim S, Chong LY, March E, et al. Computerised cognitive training for 

Collaborators GBDHL. Hearing loss prevalence and years lived with disability, 1990-2019: findings from 

Loughrey DG, Kelly ME, Kelley GA, Brennan S, Lawlor BA. Association of Age-Related Hearing Loss With 

76. 
development economics. 2013;104:184-98. 
77. 
cognitive reserve across racial/ethnic groups. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2021;17(1):70-80. 
78. 
efficiency in Alzheimer's disease. Scientific Reports. 2021;11(1). 
79. 
Chan MY, Han L, Carreno CA, Zhang Z, Rodriguez RM, LaRose M, et al. Long-term prognosis and 
educational determinants of brain network decline in older adult individuals. Nat Aging. 2021;1(11):1053-67. 
80. 
Anderson EL, Howe LD, Wade KH, Ben-Shlomo Y, Hill WD, Deary IJ, et al. Education, intelligence and 
Alzheimer's disease: evidence from a multivariable two-sample Mendelian randomization study. Int J Epidemiol. 
2020;49(4):1163-72. 
81. 
Adults: a Systematic Overview of Systematic Reviews. Neuropsychol Rev. 2020;30(2):167-93. 
82. 
12 or more weeks for maintaining cognitive function in cognitively healthy people in late life. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2020;2(2):CD012277. 
83. 
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet. 2021;397(10278):996-1009. 
84. 
Cognitive Function, Cognitive Impairment, and Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2018;144(2):115-26. 
85.  Wei JK, Hu YR, Zhang L, Hao Q, Yang RW, Lu HD, et al. Hearing Impairment, Mild Cognitive Impairment, 
and Dementia: A Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies. Dement Ger Cogn D Ex. 2017;7(3):440-52. 
86. 
Fu X, Eikelboom RH, Tian R, Liu B, Wang S, Jayakody DMP. The Relationship of Age-Related Hearing Loss 
with Cognitive Decline and Dementia in a Sinitic Language-Speaking Adult Population: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis. Innov Aging. 2023;7(1):igac078. 
87. 
Studies. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021;13. 
88. 
of Dementia Among Black and White Older Adults. J Gerontol a-Biol. 2019;74(6):890-6. 
89. 
Incident Dementia and Cognitive Decline in Older Adults: The Health ABC Study. J Gerontol a-Biol. 
2017;72(5):703-9. 
90. 
Dementia. Arch Neurol-Chicago. 2011;68(2):214-20. 
91. 
ability, and dementia in men age 19-78 years. Eur J Epidemiol. 2019;34(2):125-30. 
Powell DS, Brenowitz WD, Yaffe K, Armstrong NM, Reed NS, Lin FR, et al. Examining the Combined 
92. 
Estimated Effects of Hearing Loss and Depressive Symptoms on Risk of Cognitive Decline and Incident Dementia. 
J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2022;77(5):839-49. 
93. 
hearing loss and development of dementia using formal behavioural audiometric testing within the Mayo Clinic 
Study of Aging (MCSA): a prospective population-based study. Lancet Health Longev. 2022;3(12):E817-E24. 
94. 
studies. Epidemiology. 2009;20(4):488-95. 
95. 
of dementia in The HUNT Study (HUNT4 70+): a Norwegian cohort study. Eclinicalmedicine. 2023;66. 

Myrstad C, Engdahl BL, Costafreda SG, Krokstad S, Lin F, Livingston G, et al. Hearing impairment and risk 

Brenowitz WD, Kaup AR, Lin FR, Yaffe K. Multiple Sensory Impairment Is Associated With Increased Risk 

Liang Z, Li A, Xu YY, Qian XY, Gao X. Hearing Loss and Dementia: A Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort 

Schisterman EF, Cole SR, Platt RW. Overadjustment bias and unnecessary adjustment in epidemiologic 

Marinelli JP, Lohse CM, Fussell WL, Petersen RC, Reed NS, Machulda MM, et al. Association between 

Osler M, Christensen GT, Mortensen EL, Christensen K, Garde E, Rozing MP. Hearing loss, cognitive 

Deal JA, Betz J, Yaffe K, Harris T, Purchase-Helzner E, Satterfield S, et al. Hearing Impairment and 

Lin FR, Metter EJ, O'Brien RJ, Resnick SM, Zonderman AB, Ferrucci L. Hearing Loss and Incident 

66 

Lin FR, Pike JR, Albert MS, Arnold M, Burgard S, Chisolm T, et al. Hearing intervention versus health 

Stevenson JS, Clifton L, Kuzma E, Littlejohns TJ. Speech-in-noise hearing impairment is associated with an 

Griffiths TD, Lad M, Kumar S, Holmes E, McMurray B, Maguire EA, et al. How Can Hearing Loss Cause 

Sugiura S, Uchida Y, Nishita Y, Teranishi M, Shimono M, Suzuki H, et al. Prevalence of usage of hearing 

Ford AH, Hankey GJ, Yeap BB, Golledge J, Flicker L, Almeida OP. Hearing loss and the risk of dementia in 

Livingston G, Costafreda SG. Interventions to prevent dementia should target those at high risk. Lancet. 

Karlsson IK, Bennet AM, Ploner A, Andersson TML, Reynolds CA, Gatz M, Pedersen NL. Apolipoprotein E 

Stafford J, Chung WT, Sommerlad A, Kirkbride JB, Howard R. Psychiatric disorders and risk of subsequent 

96. 
aids and its association with cognitive impairment in Japanese community-dwelling elders with hearing loss. 
Auris Nasus Larynx. 2022;49(1):18-25. 
97. 
increased risk of incident dementia in 82,039 UK Biobank participants. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2022;18(3):445-
56. 
98. 
Dementia? Neuron. 2020;108(3):401-12. 
99. 
later life. Maturitas. 2018;112:1-11. 
100. 
education control to reduce cognitive decline in older adults with hearing loss in the USA (ACHIEVE): a 
multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2023. 
101. 
2023. 
Yeo BSY, Song H, Toh EMS, Ng LS, Ho CSH, Ho R, et al. Association of Hearing Aids and Cochlear Implants 
102. 
With Cognitive Decline and Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol. 2023;80(2):134-41. 
103. 
Bucholc M, McClean PL, Bauermeister S, Todd S, Ding XM, Ye QY, et al. Association of the use of hearing 
aids with the conversion from mild cognitive impairment to dementia and progression of dementia: A 
longitudinal retrospective study. Alzh Dement-Trci. 2021;7(1). 
104. 
dementia: Systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2022;37(5). 
105. 
epsilon 4 genotype and the temporal relationship between depression and dementia. Neurobiology of Aging. 
2015;36(4):1751-6. 
106. 
retrospective cohort study based in general practice. Age Ageing. 1996;25(3):231-3. 
107. 
risks of dementia and alzheimer's disease: A nationwide longitudinal study. J Affect Disord. 2020;274:806-12. 
108. 
Up of the Maastricht Aging Study. Am J Geriat Psychiat. 2011;19(10):902-5. 
109.  Mirza SS, de Bruijn RF, Direk N, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Ikram MA, Tiemeier H. Depressive symptoms 
predict incident dementia during short- but not long-term follow-up period. Alzheimers Dement. 2014;10(5 
Suppl):S323-S9 e1. 
110. 
impairment, and dementia. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70(3):374-82. 
111.  Wang TY, Wei HT, Liou YJ, Su TP, Bai YM, Tsai SJ, et al. Risk for developing dementia among patients with 
posttraumatic stress disorder: A nationwide longitudinal study. J Affect Disorders. 2016;205:306-10. 
112. 
and Late-Life Depression With Incident Dementia in a Danish Cohort. Jama Neurology. 2023. 
113. 
of dementia in late life: A nationwide twin study. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2021;17(8):1383-90. 
114.  Ouanes S, Popp J. High Cortisol and the Risk of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease: A Review of the 
Literature. Front Aging Neurosci. 2019;11:43. 
115. 
Incident Dementia: A Prospective Cohort Study of 354,313 Participants. Biol Psychiatry. 2022. 
116.  Organization WH. Risk reduction of cognitive decline and dementia: WHO guidelines. 2019. Report No.: 
9241550546. 

Yang WZ, Li XR, Pan KY, Yang RR, Song RX, Qi XY, et al. Association of life-course depression with the risk 

Kohler S, van Boxtel M, Jolles J, Verhey F. Depressive Symptoms and Risk for Dementia: A 9-Year Follow-

Chan YE, Chen MH, Tsai SJ, Bai YM, Tsai CF, Cheng CM, et al. Treatment-Resistant depression enhances 

Buntinx F, Kester A, Bergers J, Knottnerus JA. Is depression in elderly people followed by dementia? A 

Yang L, Deng YT, Leng Y, Ou YN, Li YZ, Chen SD, et al. Depression, Depression Treatments, and Risk of 

Elser H, Horvath-Puho E, Gradus JL, Smith ML, Lash TL, Glymour MM, et al. Association of Early-, Middle-, 

Richard E, Reitz C, Honig LH, Schupf N, Tang MX, Manly JJ, et al. Late-life depression, mild cognitive 

67 

Bruno D, Rutherford A. Cognitive ability in former professional football (soccer) players is associated 

Fann JR, Ribe AR, Pedersen HS, Fenger-Gron M, Christensen J, Benros ME, Vestergaard M. Traumatic 

Van Pelt KL, Puetz T, Swallow J, Lapointe AP, Broglio SP. Data-Driven Risk Classification of Concussion 

Gu D, Ou S, Liu G. Traumatic Brain Injury and Risk of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease: A Systematic 

Dams-O'Connor K, Awwad HO, Hoffman S, Pugh MJ, Johnson VE, Keene CD, et al. Alzheimer's Disease-

Gardner RC, Bahorik A, Kornblith ES, Allen IE, Plassman BL, Yaffe K. Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, 

Raj R, Kaprio J, Jousilahti P, Korja M, Siironen J. Risk of Dementia After Hospitalization Due to Traumatic 

Graham A, Livingston G, Purnell L, Huntley J. Mild Traumatic Brain Injuries and Future Risk of Developing 

117.  Wang GHM, Li PP, Wang YH, Guo JC, Wilson DL, Lo-Ciganic WH. Association between Antidepressants 
and Dementia Risk in Older Adults with Depression: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Clin Med. 
2023;12(19). 
118. 
Review and Meta-Analysis. Neuroepidemiology. 2022;56(1):4-16. 
119. 
and Population Attributable Risk of Dementia Associated with Traumatic Brain Injury in Civilians and Veterans. J 
Neurotrauma. 2022. 
120.  Maas AIR, Menon DK, Manley GT, Abrams M, Akerlund C, Andelic N, et al. Traumatic brain injury: 
progress and challenges in prevention, clinical care, and research. Lancet Neurol. 2022;21(11):1004-60. 
121. 
Brain Injury: A Longitudinal, Population-Based Study. Neurology. 2022. 
122.  Management of Concussion/m TBIWG. VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Management of 
Concussion/Mild Traumatic Brain Injury. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2009;46(6):CP1-68. 
123. 
brain injury and dementia - Authors' reply. Lancet Psychiatry. 2018;5(10):783. 
124. 
Alzheimer's Disease: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;87(3):969-79. 
125. 
Related Dementias Summit 2022: National Research Priorities for the Investigation of Post-Traumatic Brain 
Injury Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias. J Neurotrauma. 2023;40(15-16):1512-23. 
126. 
Rates: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Medicine. 2021;51(6):1227-44. 
127. 
with estimated heading frequency. J Neuropsychol. 2022;16(2):434-43. 
128. 
Career Length With Risk of Neurodegenerative Disease in Male Former Professional Soccer Players. Jama 
Neurology. 2021;78(9):1057-63. 
129. 
among former international rugby union players. J Neurol Neurosur Ps. 2022;93(12):1262-8. 
130.  Orhant E, Carling C, Chapellier JF, Marchand JL, Pradat PF, Elbaz A, et al. A retrospective analysis of all-
cause and cause-specific mortality rates in French male professional footballers. Scand J Med Sci Spor. 
2022;32(9):1389-99. 
131.  Ueda P, Pasternak B, Lim CE, Neovius M, Kader M, Forssblad M, et al. Neurodegenerative disease among 
male elite football (soccer) players in Sweden: a cohort study. Lancet Public Health. 2023. 
132. 
Disorders and Stroke Consensus Diagnostic Criteria for Traumatic Encephalopathy Syndrome. Neurology. 
2021;96(18):848-63. 
133. 
Neurodegenerative Disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2022;91(5):498-507. 
134. 
to clinical trials in dementia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2019;90(11):1221-33. 
135. 
Crane PK, Gibbons LE, Dams-O'Connor K, Trittschuh E, Leverenz JB, Keene CD, et al. Association of 
Traumatic Brain Injury With Late-Life Neurodegenerative Conditions and Neuropathologic Findings. Jama 
Neurology. 2016;73(9):1062-9. 
136.  Mohamed AZ, Nestor PJ, Cumming P, Nasrallah FA, Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging I. Traumatic brain 
injury fast-forwards Alzheimer's pathology: evidence from amyloid positron emission tomorgraphy imaging. J 
Neurol. 2022;269(2):873-84. 

Graham NS, Sharp DJ. Understanding neurodegeneration after traumatic brain injury: from mechanisms 

Russell ER, Mackay DF, Lyall D, Stewart K, MacLean JA, Robson J, et al. Neurodegenerative disease risk 

Katz DI, Bernick C, Dodick DW, Mez J, Mariani ML, Adler CH, et al. National Institute of Neurological 

Russell ER, Mackay DF, Stewart K, MacLean JA, Pell JP, Stewart W. Association of Field Position and 

Brett BL, Gardner RC, Godbout J, Dams-O'Connor K, Keene CD. Traumatic Brain Injury and Risk of 

68 

Chen H, Cao Y, Ma Y, Xu W, Zong G, Yuan C. Age- and sex-specific modifiable risk factor profiles of 

Juul Rasmussen I, Rasmussen KL, Nordestgaard BG, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Frikke-Schmidt R. Impact of 

Edlow BL, Keene CD, Perl DP, Iacono D, Folkerth RD, Stewart W, et al. Multimodal Characterization of 

James SN, Nicholas JM, Lane CA, Parker TD, Lu K, Keshavan A, et al. A population-based study of head 

Zhong G, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Guo JJ, Zhao Y. Smoking is associated with an increased risk of dementia: a 

Hwang PH, Ang TFA, De Anda-Duran I, Liu X, Liu Y, Gurnani A, et al. Examination of potentially modifiable 

137. 
injury, cognitive function and pathological markers. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2021;8(4):842-56. 
138. 
the Late Effects of Traumatic Brain Injury: A Methodological Overview of the Late Effects of Traumatic Brain 
Injury Project. J Neurotrauma. 2018;35(14):1604-19. 
139. 
Schaffert J, LoBue C, White CL, Chiang HS, Didehbani N, Lacritz L, et al. Traumatic brain injury history is 
associated with an earlier age of dementia onset in autopsy-confirmed Alzheimer's disease. Neuropsychology. 
2018;32(4):410-6. 
140. 
meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies with investigation of potential effect modifiers. PLoS One. 
2015;10(3):e0118333. 
141. 
dementia risk factors across the adult life course: The Framingham Heart Study. Alzheimers Dement. 2023. 
142. 
Gottesman RF, Albert MS, Alonso A, Coker LH, Coresh J, Davis SM, et al. Associations Between Midlife 
Vascular Risk Factors and 25-Year Incident Dementia in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Cohort. 
JAMA Neurol. 2017;74(10):1246-54. 
143. 
Raggi M, Dugravot A, Valeri L, Machado-Fragua MD, Dumurgier J, Kivimaki M, et al. Contribution of 
smoking towards the association between socioeconomic position and dementia: 32-year follow-up of the 
Whitehall II prospective cohort study. Lancet Reg Health Eur. 2022;23:100516. 
144. 
dementia: evidence from the UK Biobank. Eur J Epidemiol. 2023;38(1):83-93. 
145. 
cardiovascular risk factors and genetics on 10-year absolute risk of dementia: risk charts for targeted prevention. 
Eur Heart J. 2020;41(41):4024-33. 
146. 
Risk of Dementia in Korea. Jama Netw Open. 2023;6(1):e2251506. 
147. 
Patients With Newly Diagnosed Atrial Fibrillation. Jama Netw Open. 2022;5(6). 
148.  Wang R, Qiu CX, Dintica CS, Shang Y, Larranaga AC, Wang HX, Xu WL. Shared risk and protective factors 
between Alzheimer's disease and ischemic stroke: A population-based longitudinal study. Alzheimers & 
Dementia. 2021;17(2):191-204. 
149. 
Sabia S, Fayosse A, Dumurgier J, Schnitzler A, Empana JP, Ebmeier KP, et al. Association of ideal 
cardiovascular health at age 50 with incidence of dementia: 25 year follow-up of Whitehall II cohort study. Bmj-
Brit Med J. 2019;366. 
150. 
older adults: 10 year, population based, prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2023;380:e072691. 
151. 
Cholesterol and Risk of Late-Life Dementia: Review and Meta-Analysis. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;56(1):215-28. 
152.  Wood WG, Li L, Muller WE, Eckert GP. Cholesterol as a causative factor in Alzheimer's disease: a 
debatable hypothesis. J Neurochem. 2014;129(4):559-72. 
153.  Wee J, Sukudom S, Bhat S, Marklund M, Peiris NJ, Hoyos CM, et al. The relationship between midlife 
dyslipidemia and lifetime incidence of dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Alzh 
Dement-Dadm. 2023;15(1). 
154. 
dementia in more than 1.8 million people over two decades: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Healthy 
Longev. 2021;2(8):e498-e506. 

Lee HJ, Lee SR, Choi EK, Park SH, Chung JW, Choi JM, et al. Risk of Dementia After Smoking Cessation in 

Jia J, Zhao T, Liu Z, Liang Y, Li F, Li Y, et al. Association between healthy lifestyle and memory decline in 

Iwagami M, Qizilbash N, Gregson J, Douglas I, Johnson M, Pearce N, et al. Blood cholesterol and risk of 

Jeong SM, Park J, Han K, Yoo J, Yoo JE, Lee CM, et al. Association of Changes in Smoking Intensity With 

Anstey KJ, Ashby-Mitchell K, Peters R. Updating the Evidence on the Association between Serum 

69 

Zhang XL, Tong T, Chang A, Ang TFA, Tao QS, Auerbach S, et al. Midlife lipid and glucose levels are 

Kjeldsen EW, Thomassen JQ, Rasmussen KL, Nordestgaard BG, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Frikke-Schmidt R. 

Zhang X, Tian Q, Liu D, Geng T, Xu X, Ge S, et al. Causal association of circulating cholesterol levels with 

Pedrini S, Chatterjee P, Hone E, Martins RN. High-density lipoprotein-related cholesterol metabolism in 

Patnode CD, Redmond N, Iacocca MO, Henninger M. Behavioral Counseling Interventions to Promote a 

Caniglia EC, Rojas-Saunero LP, Hilal S, Licher S, Logan R, Stricker B, et al. Emulating a target trial of statin 

155. 
Adherence to dietary guidelines and risk of dementia: a prospective cohort study of 94 184 individuals. 
Epidemiol Psych Sci. 2022;31. 
156. 
associated with Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2023;19(1):181-93. 
157. 
dementia: a mendelian randomization meta-analysis. Transl Psychiatry. 2020;10(1):145. 
Peters R, Xu Y, Antikainen R, Beckett N, Gussekloo J, Jagger C, et al. Evaluation of High Cholesterol and 
158. 
Risk of Dementia and Cognitive Decline in Older Adults Using Individual Patient Meta-Analysis. Dement Geriatr 
Cogn. 2021;50(4):318-25. 
159. 
Alzheimer's disease. J Neurochem. 2021;159(2):343-77. 
160. 
Healthy Diet and Physical Activity for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Adults Without Known Cardiovascular 
Disease Risk Factors: Updated Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. 
Jama. 2022;328(4):375-88. 
161.  Oesterle A, Laufs U, Liao JK. Pleiotropic Effects of Statins on the Cardiovascular System. Circ Res. 
2017;120(1):229-43. 
162.  Olmastroni E, Molari G, De Beni N, Colpani O, Galimberti F, Gazzotti M, et al. Statin use and risk of 
dementia or Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Eur J Prev 
Cardiol. 2022;29(5):804-14. 
163.  McGuinness B, Craig D, Bullock R, Passmore P. Statins for the prevention of dementia. Cochrane Db Syst 
Rev. 2016(1). 
164. 
use and risk of dementia using cohort data. Neurology. 2020;95(10):e1322-e32. 
165. 
for dementia and Alzheimer's disease: systematic review, meta-analysis and quality assessment of cohort and 
case-control studies. Brit J Sport Med. 2022;56(12). 
166. 
adulthood on later-life cognition: 30 years follow-up in the 1946 British birth cohort. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2023. 
167. 
Tari AR, Selbæk G, Franklin BA, Bergh S, Skjellegrind H, Sallis RE, et al. Temporal changes in personal 
activity intelligence and the risk of incident dementia and dementia related mortality: A prospective cohort 
study (HUNT). Eclinicalmedicine. 2022;52. 
168. 
Longitudinal Assessment of Physical Activity and Cognitive Outcomes Among Women at Midlife. Jama Netw 
Open. 2021;4(3). 
169. 
Aerobic Exercise on Cognition in Older Adults: The Generation 100 Study: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Sports 
Med. 2022;52(7):1689-99. 
170. 
umbrella review of randomized control trials on the effects of physical exercise on cognition. Nat Hum Behav. 
2023. 
171.  Organization WH. Tackling NCDs: ‘best buys’ and other recommended interventions for the prevention 
and control of noncommunicable diseases Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017 [cited 2023 16/02]. 
Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/259232. 
172. 
training teach us how to treat Alzheimer's disease? Ageing Research Reviews. 2022;75. 

Iso-Markku P, Kujala UM, Knittle K, Polet J, Vuoksimaa E, Waller K. Physical activity as a protective factor 

Huuha AM, Norevik CS, Moreira JBN, Kobro-Flatmoen A, Scrimgeour N, Kivipelto M, et al. Can exercise 

Zotcheva E, Haberg AK, Wisloff U, Salvesen O, Selbaek G, Stensvold D, Ernstsen L. Effects of 5 Years 

Greendale GA, Han WJ, Huang MH, Upchurch DM, Karvonen-Gutierrez C, Avis NE, Karlamangla AS. 

James SN, Chiou YJ, Fatih N, Needham LP, Schott JM, Richards M. Timing of physical activity across 

Ciria LF, Roman-Caballero R, Vadillo MA, Holgado D, Luque-Casado A, Perakakis P, Sanabria D. An 

70 

de Freitas GB, Lourenco MV, De Felice FG. Protective actions of exercise‐related FNDC5/Irisin in memory 

Casaletto KB, Rentería MA, Pa J, Tom SE, Harrati A, Armstrong NM, et al. Late-Life Physical and Cognitive 

Raji CA, Meysami S, Hashemi S, Garg S, Akbari N, Ahmed G, et al. Exercise-Related Physical Activity 

Zheng B, Su BW, Ahmadi-Abhari S, Kapogiannis D, Tzoulaki I, Riboli E, Middleton L. Dementia risk in 

Tian S, Jiang J, Wang J, Zhang Z, Miao Y, Ji X, Bi Y. Comparison on cognitive outcomes of antidiabetic 

Xue M, Xu W, Ou YN, Cao XP, Tan MS, Tan L, Yu JT. Diabetes mellitus and risks of cognitive impairment 

173. 
Relates to Brain Volumes in 10,125 Individuals. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;97(2):829-39. 
174. 
Activities Independently Contribute to Brain and Cognitive Resilience. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;74(1):363-76. 
175. 
and Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem. 2020;155(6):602-11. 
176. 
and dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of 144 prospective studies. Ageing Res Rev. 
2019;55:100944. 
177.  Michailidis M, Moraitou D, Tata DA, Kalinderi K, Papamitsou T, Papaliagkas V. Alzheimer's Disease as 
Type 3 Diabetes: Common Pathophysiological Mechanisms between Alzheimer's Disease and Type 2 Diabetes. 
Int J Mol Sci. 2022;23(5). 
178. 
agents for type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and network meta‐analysis. Diabetes/Metabolism Research and 
Reviews. 2023:e3673. 
179. 
patients with type 2 diabetes: Comparing metformin with no pharmacological treatment. Alzheimers & 
Dementia. 2023;19(12):5681-9. 
180.  Nørgaard CH, Friedrich S, Hansen CT, Gerds T, Ballard C, Møller DV, et al. Treatment with glucagon‐like 
peptide‐1 receptor agonists and incidence of dementia: Data from pooled double‐blind randomized controlled 
trials and nationwide disease and prescription registers. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & 
Clinical Interventions. 2022;8(1):e12268. 
Tang H, Shao H, Shaaban CE, Yang K, Brown J, Anton S, et al. Newer glucose-lowering drugs and risk of 
181. 
dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2023;71(7):2096-
106. 
182. 
Patients With Diabetes: A Population-based Cohort Study. Endocr Pract. 2023;29(4):247-53. 
183. 
Diabetologia. 2023;66(6):1156-8. 
184. 
Long-Term Intensive Lifestyle Intervention on Cognitive Function: Action for Health in Diabetes Study. Journal of 
the American Geriatrics Society. 2017;65(5):966-72. 
185. 
incident dementia: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry. 2020;216(1):16-28. 
186. 
Blood Pressure, and Estimated Risk of Dementia in Late Life: An Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis. Jama 
Netw Open. 2023;6(9):e2333353. 
187.  Mahinrad S, Bennett DA, Sorond FA, Gorelick PB. Blood pressure variability, dementia, and role of 
antihypertensive medications in older adults. Alzheimers Dement. 2023. 
188. 
Pressure and Later-Life Cognition Among Black and White Individuals. Jama Neurology. 2020;77(7):810-9. 
189. 
Lowering With Incident Dementia or Cognitive Impairment: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Jama. 
2020;323(19):1934-44. 
190. 
Cunningham EL, Todd SA, Passmore P, Bullock R, McGuinness B. Pharmacological treatment of 
hypertension in people without prior cerebrovascular disease for the prevention of cognitive impairment and 
dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;5(5):Cd004034. 

Chen PC, Hong CT, Chen WT, Chan L, Chien LN. Metformin Adherence Reduces the Risk of Dementia in 

Levine DA, Gross AL, Briceno EM, Tilton N, Kabeto MU, Hingtgen SM, et al. Association Between Blood 

Hughes D, Judge C, Murphy R, Loughlin E, Costello M, Whiteley W, et al. Association of Blood Pressure 

Peters R, Peters J, Booth A, Anstey KJ. Trajectory of blood pressure, body mass index, cholesterol and 

Lennon MJ, Lam BCP, Lipnicki DM, Crawford JD, Peters R, Schutte AE, et al. Use of Antihypertensives, 

Rapp SR, Luchsinger JA, Baker LD, Blackburn GL, Hazuda HP, Demos-McDermott KE, et al. Effect of a 

Anderson EL, Williams DM. Drug target Mendelian randomisation: are we really instrumenting drug use? 

71 

den Brok M, van Dalen JW, Abdulrahman H, Larson EB, van Middelaar T, van Gool WA, et al. 

Andrews SJ, Fulton-Howard B, O'Reilly P, Marcora E, Goate AM, Genetics AsD. Causal Associations 

Ding J, Davis-Plourde KL, Sedaghat S, Tully PJ, Wang W, Phillips C, et al. Antihypertensive medications 

191. 
and risk for incident dementia and Alzheimer's disease: a meta-analysis of individual participant data from 
prospective cohort studies. Lancet Neurol. 2020;19(1):61-70. 
192. 
Antihypertensive Medication Classes and the Risk of Dementia: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-
Analysis. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2021;22(7):1386-95 e15. 
193. 
Between Modifiable Risk Factors and the Alzheimer's Phenome. Annals of Neurology. 2021;89(1):54-65. 
194. 
Risk of Dementia: A Two-Sample Mendelian Randomization Study in the UK Biobank. Biol Psychiat. 
2021;89(8):817-24. 
195. 
consequences of Alzheimer's disease: phenome-wide evidence from Mendelian randomization. Nat Commun. 
2022;13(1):4726. 
196.  Ostergaard SD, Mukherjee S, Sharp SJ, Proitsi P, Lotta LA, Day F, et al. Associations between Potentially 
Modifiable Risk Factors and Alzheimer Disease: A Mendelian Randomization Study. Plos Med. 2015;12(6). 
197.  Williamson GM. Effect of Intensive vs Standard Blood Pressure Control on Probable Dementia 

Sproviero W, Winchester L, Newby D, Fernandes M, Shi L, Goodday SM, et al. High Blood Pressure and 

Korologou-Linden R, Bhatta L, Brumpton BM, Howe LD, Millard LAC, Kolaric K, et al. The causes and 

Twells LK, Harris Walsh K, Blackmore A, Adey T, Donnan J, Peddle J, et al. Nonsurgical weight loss 

Tang X, Zhao W, Lu M, Zhang X, Zhang P, Xin Z, et al. Relationship between central obesity and the 

Safaei M, Sundararajan EA, Driss M, Boulila W, Shapi'i A. A systematic literature review on obesity: 

Veronese N, Facchini S, Stubbs B, Luchini C, Solmi M, Manzato E, et al. Weight loss is associated with 

A Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama. 2019;321(6). 
198.  Qu Y, Hu H-Y, Ou Y-N, Shen X-N, Xu W, Wang Z-T, et al. Association of body mass index with risk of 
cognitive impairment and dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Neuroscience 
& Biobehavioral Reviews. 2020;115:189-98. 
199. 
incidence of cognitive impairment and dementia from cohort studies involving 5,060,687 participants. 
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. 2021;130:301-13. 
200. 
Understanding the causes & consequences of obesity and reviewing various machine learning approaches used 
to predict obesity. Computers in biology and medicine. 2021;136:104754. 
201. 
improvements in cognitive function among overweight and obese people: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. 2017;72:87-94. 
202. 
interventions: A systematic review of systematic reviews and meta‐analyses. Obes Rev. 2021;22(11):e13320. 
203. 
Batterham RL. Weight stigma in healthcare settings is detrimental to health and must be eradicated. 
Nature Reviews Endocrinology. 2022;18(7):387-8. 
204. 
weight change with risk of dementia and its major subtypes: A meta-analysis consisting 2.8 million adults with 
57 294 cases of dementia. Obes Rev. 2020;21(4). 
Kivimaki M, Singh-Manoux A, Batty GD, Sabia S, Sommerlad A, Floud S, et al. Association of Alcohol-
205. 
Induced Loss of Consciousness and Overall Alcohol Consumption With Risk for Dementia. Jama Netw Open. 
2020;3(9):e2016084. 
206. 
scoping review. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019;11(1):1. 
207. 
of adults in Germany: A cohort study. Plos Med. 2021;18(11):e1003819. 
208. 
risk of disabling dementia in a large population-based cohort study in Japan. Int J Geriatr Psych. 2023;38(3). 

John U, Rumpf HJ, Hanke M, Meyer C. Alcohol abstinence and mortality in a general population sample 

Shimizu Y, Sawada N, Ihira H, Abe SK, Inoue M, Yasuda N, et al. Alcohol consumption from midlife and 

Lee CM, Woodward M, Batty GD, Beiser AS, Bell S, Berr C, et al. Association of anthropometry and 

Rehm J, Hasan OSM, Black SE, Shield KD, Schwarzinger M. Alcohol use and dementia: a systematic 

72 

Shen C, Rolls ET, Cheng W, Kang J, Dong G, Xie C, et al. Associations of social isolation and loneliness with 

Jeon KH, Han K, Jeong SM, Park J, Yoo JE, Yoo J, et al. Changes in Alcohol Consumption and Risk of 

Kuiper JS, Zuidersma M, Oude Voshaar RC, Zuidema SU, van den Heuvel ER, Stolk RP, Smidt N. Social 

Goldwater D, Karlamangla A, Merkin SS, Seeman T. Compared to non-drinkers, individuals who drink 

Andrews SJ, Goate A, Anstey KJ. Association between alcohol consumption and Alzheimer's disease: A 

Akhter‐Khan SC, Tao Q, Ang TFA, Itchapurapu IS, Alosco ML, Mez J, et al. Associations of loneliness with 

Sommerlad A, Kivimaki M, Larson EB, Rohr S, Shirai K, Singh-Manoux A, Livingston G. Social participation 

209.  Mewton L, Visontay R, Hoy N, Lipnicki DM, Sunderland M, Lipton RB, et al. The relationship between 
alcohol use and dementia in adults aged more than 60 years: a combined analysis of prospective, individual-
participant data from 15 international studies. Addiction. 2023;118(3):412-24. 
210. 
Mendelian randomization study. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2020;16(2):345-53. 
211. 
alcohol have a more favorable multisystem physiologic risk score as measured by allostatic load. PLoS One. 
2019;14(9):e0223168. 
212. 
Dementia in a Nationwide Cohort in South Korea. Jama Netw Open. 2023;6(2):e2254771. 
213. 
relationships and risk of dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal cohort studies. Ageing 
Research Reviews. 2015;22(pp 39-57):July-57. 
214. 
Penninkilampi R, Casey AN, Singh MF, Brodaty H. The Association between Social Engagement, 
Loneliness, and Risk of Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;66(4):1619-33. 
Elovainio M, Lahti J, Pirinen M, Pulkki-Råback L, Malmberg A, Lipsanen J, et al. Association of social 
215. 
isolation, loneliness and genetic risk with incidence of dementia: UK Biobank Cohort Study. BMJ open. 
2022;12(2):e053936. 
216. 
later dementia. Neurology. 2022;99(2):e164-e75. 
217. 
and risk of developing dementia. Nat Aging. 2023;3(5):532-45. 
218. 
risk of Alzheimer's disease dementia in the Framingham Heart Study. Alzheimer's & Dementia. 
2021;17(10):1619-27. 
219. 
Gerontology: Series B. 2020;75(7):1414-22. 
220. 
10-year dementia risk and early markers of vulnerability for neurocognitive decline. Neurology. 
2022;98(13):e1337-e48. 
221. 
support, is associated with cognitive decline and dementia across two longitudinal population-based cohorts. 
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease. 2022;85(1):295-308. 
222. 
with a risk of dementia in a general Japanese older population: the Hisayama study. The Journals of 
Gerontology: Series B. 2021;76(9):1756-66. 
223. 
and risk of dementia: An 18-year follow-up of the Whitehall II Study. Neurology. 2020;95(20):e2803-e15. 
224. 
long-term dementia risk: the prospective UK Million Women Study. The Lancet Public Health. 2021;6(2):e116-
e23. 
Pitkala KH, Routasalo P, Kautiainen H, Sintonen H, Tilvis RS. Effects of socially stimulating group 
225. 
intervention on lonely, older people's cognition: a randomized, controlled trial. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2011;19(7):654-63. 
226. 
Engagement on Cognitive Function in Older Adults: The Synapse Project. Psychol Sci. 2014;25(1):103-12. 

Sommerlad A, Sabia S, Livingston G, Kivimäki M, Lewis G, Singh-Manoux A. Leisure activity participation 

Shibata M, Ohara T, Hosoi M, Hata J, Yoshida D, Hirabayashi N, et al. Emotional loneliness is associated 

Floud S, Balkwill A, Sweetland S, Brown A, Reus EM, Hofman A, et al. Cognitive and social activities and 

Salinas J, Beiser AS, Samra JK, O'Donnell A, DeCarli CS, Gonzales MM, et al. Association of loneliness with 

Freak-Poli R, Wagemaker N, Wang R, Lysen TS, Ikram MA, Vernooij MW, et al. Loneliness, not social 

Park DC, Lodi-Smith J, Drew L, Haber S, Hebrank A, Bischof GN, Aamodt W. The Impact of Sustained 

Sutin AR, Stephan Y, Luchetti M, Terracciano A. Loneliness and risk of dementia. The Journals of 

73 

Abolhasani E, Hachinski V, Ghazaleh N, Azarpazhooh MR, Mokhber N, Martin J. Air Pollution and 

Park SY, Han J, Kim SH, Suk HW, Park JE, Lee DY. Impact of Long-Term Exposure to Air Pollution on 

He F, Tang J, Zhang T, Lin J, Li F, Gu X, et al. Impact of air pollution exposure on the risk of Alzheimer's 

Tan J, Li N, Wang X, Chen G, Yan L, Wang L, et al. Associations of particulate matter with dementia and 

227.  Mortimer JA, Ding D, Borenstein AR, DeCarli C, Guo QH, Wu YG, et al. Changes in Brain Volume and 
Cognition in a Randomized Trial of Exercise and Social Interaction in a Community-Based Sample of Non-
Demented Chinese Elders. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;30(4):757-66. 
228.  Ngandu T, Lehtisalo J, Solomon A, Levalahti E, Ahtiluoto S, Antikainen R, et al. A 2 year multidomain 
intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive training, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive 
decline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015;385(9984):2255-63. 
229.  Moon SY, Hong CH, Jeong JH, Park YK, Na HR, Song HS, et al. Facility-based and home-based 
multidomain interventions including cognitive training, exercise, diet, vascular risk management, and motivation 
for older adults: a randomized controlled feasibility trial. Aging-Us. 2021;13(12):15898-+. 
230. 
Incidence of Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Neurology. 2023;100(2):e242-e54. 
231.  Wilker EH, Osman M, Weisskopf MG. Ambient air pollution and clinical dementia: systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMJ. 2023;381:e071620. 
232. 
mild cognitive impairment in China: A multicenter cross-sectional study. Innovation (Cambridge (Mass)). 
2021;2(3):100147. 
233. 
disease in China: A community-based cohort study. Environmental research. 2022;205:112318. 
234. 
Cognitive Decline in Older Adults Without Dementia. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;86(2):553-63. 
Sommerlad A, Liu KY. Air pollution and dementia. BMJ. 2023;381:655. 
235. 
236. 
Pu F, Hu Y, Li C, Cao X, Yang Z, Liu Y, et al. Association of solid fuel use with a risk score capturing 
dementia risk among middle-aged and older adults: A prospective cohort study. Environmental research. 
2023;218:115022. 
237. 
cooking fuels and late-life cognitive function: A harmonized analysis of India, Mexico, and China. Environment 
international. 2021;156:106722. 
238. 
Examining the Flooding of Particulate Matter into Homes during Real-World Use. Atmosphere-Basel. 
2020;11(12). 
239. 
constituents of fine particle air pollution: A national cohort study in the United States. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2023;120(1):e2211282119. 
240. 
and Long-term Exposure to Air Pollution With the Risk of Dementia. Jama Neurology. 2020;77(7):801-9. 
241. 
incident dementia: Effects of observed and hypothetical reductions in air pollutant using parametric g-
computation. Alzheimers Dement. 2022;18(12):2509-17. 
242.  Wang X, Younan D, Millstein J, Petkus AJ, Garcia E, Beavers DP, et al. Association of improved air quality 
with lower dementia risk in older women. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2022;119(2). 
243. 
older adults: a population-based, quasi-experimental study. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2022;3(2):e98-e108. 
244. 
pollution research international. 2022:1-15. 
245. 
Peters R, Mudway I, Booth A, Peters J, Anstey KJ. Putting Fine Particulate Matter and Dementia in the 
Wider Context of Noncommunicable Disease: Where are We Now and What Should We Do Next: A Systematic 
Review. Neuroepidemiology. 2021;55(4):253-65. 

Grande G, Ljungman PLS, Eneroth K, Bellander T, Rizzuto D. Association Between Cardiovascular Disease 

Yao Y, Lv X, Qiu C, Li J, Wu X, Zhang H, et al. The effect of China's Clean Air Act on cognitive function in 

Shi L, Zhu Q, Wang Y, Hao H, Zhang H, Schwartz J, et al. Incident dementia and long-term exposure to 

Xie J, Lu C. Is there a casual relation between air pollution and dementia? Environmental science and 

Saenz JL, Adar SD, Zhang YS, Wilkens J, Chattopadhyay A, Lee J, Wong R. Household use of polluting 

Letellier N, Gutierrez LA, Duchesne J, Chen C, Ilango S, Helmer C, et al. Air quality improvement and 

Chakraborty R, Heydon J, Mayfield M, Mihaylova L. Indoor Air Pollution from Residential Stoves: 

74 

Ehrlich JR, Goldstein J, Swenor BK, Whitson H, Langa KM, Veliz P. Addition of Vision Impairment to a Life-

Steinmetz JD. Causes of blindness and vision impairment in 2020 and trends over 30 years, and 

Crutch SJ, Schott JM, Rabinovici GD, Murray M, Snowden JS, van der Flier WM, et al. Consensus 

Shang X, Zhu Z, Huang Y, Zhang X, Wang W, Shi D, et al. Associations of ophthalmic and systemic 

Lee CS, Gibbons LE, Lee AY, Yanagihara RT, Blazes MS, Lee ML, et al. Association Between Cataract 

Cheng Z, Luo L, Wang S, Wang Y, Sharma S, Shimadera H, et al. Status and characteristics of ambient 

 WHO global air quality guidelines: Particulate matter (PM(25) and PM(10)), ozone, nitrogen dioxide, 

Shang XW, Zhu ZT, Wei W, Ha JS, He MG. The Association between Vision Impairment and Incidence of 

246. 
sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide. WHO Guidelines Approved by the Guidelines Review Committee. 
Geneva2021. 
247.  World Health O. WHO global air quality guidelines : particulate matter (PM2.5 and PM10), ozone, 
nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. 
248. 
PM2.5 pollution in global megacities. Environment international. 2016;89-90:212-21. 
249. 
prevalence of avoidable blindness in relation to VISION 2020: the Right to Sight: an analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study (vol 2, pg 144, 2021). Lancet Global Health. 2021;9(4):E408-E. 
250. 
classification of posterior cortical atrophy. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2017;13(8):870-84. 
251. 
Dementia and Cognitive Impairment. Ophthalmology. 2021;128(8):1135-49. 
252. 
Kuzma E, Littlejohns TJ, Khawaja AP, Llewellyn DJ, Ukoumunne OC, Thiem U. Visual Impairment, Eye 
Diseases, and Dementia Risk: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;83(3):1073-87. 
253. 
Course Model of Potentially Modifiable Dementia Risk Factors in the US. Jama Neurology. 2022;79(6):623-6. 
254. 
Extraction and Development of Dementia. Jama Intern Med. 2022;182(2):134-41. 
255.  Ma LZ, Zhang YR, Li YZ, Ou YN, Yang L, Chen SD, et al. Cataract, Cataract Surgery, and Risk of Incident 
Dementia: A Prospective Cohort Study of 300,823 Participants. Biol Psychiatry. 2023;93(9):810-9. 
256. 
conditions with incident dementia in the UK Biobank. Br J Ophthalmol. 2023;107(2):275-82. 
257. 
population-based cohort study. Scientific Reports. 2020;10(1). 
258. 
Association, Beyond Diabetes Severity. Am J Ophthalmol. 2022. 
259. 
cognitive decline or dementia: A systematic review. Ageing Res Rev. 2022;82:101777. 
260. 
and cognitive decline. Cochrane Db Syst Rev. 2021(11). 
261. 
Richard E, Jongstra S, Soininen H, Brayne C, van Charante EPM, Meiller Y, et al. Healthy ageing through 
internet counselling in the elderly: the HATICE randomised controlled trial for the prevention of cardiovascular 
disease and cognitive impairment. BMJ open. 2016;6(6):e010806. 
262. 
polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation with or without multidomain intervention on cognitive function in 
elderly adults with memory complaints (MAPT): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 
2017;16(5):377-89. 
263. 
learned from clinical trials and future directions. Lancet Neurol. 2015;14(9):926-44. 
264.  Moll van Charante EP, Richard E, Eurelings L, van Dalen J, Ligthart SA, van Bussel EF, et al. Effectiveness 
of a 6-year multidomain vascular care intervention to prevent dementia (preDIVA): a cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. The Lancet. 2016;388:797-805. 
265. 
Dementia by Intensive Vascular Care (preDIVA) Trial (vol 11, e213542, 2021). Jama Neurology. 2021. 

Andrieu S, Coley N, Lovestone S, Aisen PS, Vellas B. Prevention of sporadic Alzheimer's disease: lessons 

Lee CS, Krakauer C, Su YR, Walker R, Blazes M, McCurry SM, et al. Diabetic Retinopathy and Dementia 

Hafdi M, Hoevenaar-Blom MP, Richard E. Multi-domain interventions for the prevention of dementia 

Andrieu S, Guyonnet S, Coley N, Cantet C, Bonnefoy M, Bordes S, et al. Effect of long-term omega 3 

Coley N, Giulioli C, Aisen PS, Vellas B, Andrieu S. Randomised controlled trials for the prevention of 

Hoevenaar-Blom MP, Richard E, van Charante EPM. Observational Extension of the Prevention of 

Paik JS, Ha MJ, Jung YH, Kim GH, Han KD, Kim HS, et al. Low vision and the risk of dementia: a nationwide 

75 

Gray M, Madero EN, Gills JL, Paulson S, Jones MD, Campitelli A, et al. Intervention for a Digital, 

Zülke AE, Pabst A, Luppa M, Roehr S, Seidling H, Oey A, et al. A multidomain intervention against 

Salzman T, Sarquis-Adamson Y, Son S, Montero-Odasso M, Fraser S. Associations of Multidomain 

Licher S, Wolters FJ, Pavlovic J, Kavousi M, Leening MJG, Ikram MK, Ikram MA. Effects of Eligibility 

Komulainen P, Kivipelto M, Lakka TA, Savonen K, Hassinen M, Kiviniemi V, et al. Exercise, fitness and 

Yaffe KV, E. Dublin, S. Pelz, C.B. Fleckinstein, L, Rosenberg, Barnes, D. Balderson, B.  Larson E. Effect of 

266. 
cognitive decline in an at-risk-population in Germany: Results from the cluster-randomized AgeWell.de trial. 
Alzheimers & Dementia. 2023. 
267. 
Personalized Risk-Reduction Strategies on Cognition and Dementia Risk Profile Among Older Adults: The 
SMARRT Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama Intern Med. 2024;184(1):54-62. 
268. 
Interventions With Improvements in Cognition in Mild Cognitive Impairment A Systematic Review and Meta-
analysis. Jama Netw Open. 2022;5(5). 
269. 
Ding ZH, Leung PY, Lee TL, Chan AS. Effectiveness of lifestyle medicine on cognitive functions in mild 
cognitive impairments and dementia: A systematic review on randomized controlled trials. Ageing Research 
Reviews. 2023;86. 
270. 
cognition - A randomised controlled trial in older individuals: The DR's EXTRA study. Eur Geriatr Med. 
2010;1(5):266-72. 
271. 
Criteria on Patient Selection and Treatment Implications from 10 Multidomain Dementia Prevention Trials: A 
Population-Based Study. Neuroepidemiology. 2023;57(1):14-24. 
272. 
Eggink E, Hafdi M, Hoevenaar-Blom MP, Song M, Andrieu S, Barnes LE, et al. Prevention of dementia 
using mobile phone applications (PRODEMOS): protocol for an international randomised controlled trial. BMJ 
Open. 2021;11(6):e049762. 
273. 
Cognitive, Multi-Domain Alzheimer Risk Velocity Study: Protocol for a Randomized Controlled Trial. Jmir Res 
Protoc. 2022;11(2). 
274. 
Brain: Protocol of a 3-Year Randomized Controlled Trial of a Personalized Multi-Modal Digital Health 
Intervention to Prevent Cognitive Decline Among Community Dwelling 55 to 77 Year Olds. J Alzheimers Dis. 
2019;70(s1):S221-S37. 
275.  Wesselman LM, Hooghiemstra AM, Schoonmade LJ, de Wit MC, van der Flier WM, Sikkes SA. Web-Based 
Multidomain Lifestyle Programs for Brain Health: Comprehensive Overview and Meta-Analysis. JMIR Ment 
Health. 2019;6(4):e12104. 
276. 
Representation of racial and ethnic minority populations in dementia prevention trials: a systematic review. The 
journal of prevention of Alzheimer's disease. 2022;9(1):113-8. 
277.  Walsh S, Brain J, Mukadam N, Anderson R, Greene L, Govia I, et al. A systematic review of the cost-
effectiveness of community and population interventions to reduce the modifiable risk factors for dementia. 
Maturitas. 2022;166:104-16. 
278.  Wimo A, Handels R, Antikainen R, Eriksdotter M, Jonsson L, Knapp M, et al. Dementia prevention: The 
potential long-term cost-effectiveness of the FINGER prevention program. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2022. 
279.  McRae I, Zheng L, Bourke S, Cherbuin N, Anstey KJ. Cost-Effectiveness of Dementia Prevention 
Interventions. Jpad-J Prev Alzheim. 2021;8(2):210-7. 
280. 
of dementia in a large population-based study with 11-year follow-up: The HUNT study. J Sleep Res. 
2023:e13820. 
281.  Moholdt T, Skarpsno ES, Moe B, Nilsen TIL. It is never too late to start: adherence to physical activity 
recommendations for 11-22 years and risk of all-cause and cardiovascular disease mortality. The HUNT Study. Br 
J Sports Med. 2020. 

Heffernan M, Andrews G, Fiatarone Singh MA, Valenzuela M, Anstey KJ, Maeder AJ, et al. Maintain Your 

Selbaek-Tungevag S, Selbaek G, Strand BH, Myrstad C, Livingston G, Lydersen S, et al. Insomnia and risk 

Shaw AR, Perales-Puchalt J, Johnson E, Espinoza-Kissell P, Acosta-Rullan M, Frederick S, et al. 

76 

Lindhout JE, van Dalen JW, van Gool WA, Richard E. The challenge of dementia prevention trials and the 

Letellier N, Ilango SD, Mortamais M, Tzourio C, Gabelle A, Empana JP, et al. Socioeconomic inequalities 

282.  Marteau TM, Rutter H, Marmot M. Changing behaviour: an essential component of tackling health 
inequalities. BMJ. 2021;372:n332. 
283.  Walsh S, Govia I, Wallace L, Richard E, Peters R, Anstey KJ, Brayne C. A whole-population approach is 
required for dementia risk reduction. Lancet Global Health. 2022;3(1):E6-E8. 
284.  Walsh S, Merrick R, Brayne C. The relevance of social and commercial determinants for neurological 
health. Lancet Neurol. 2022;21(12):1151-60. 
285. 
in dementia risk among a French population-based cohort: quantifying the role of cardiovascular health and 
vascular events. Eur J Epidemiol. 2021;36(10):1015-23. 
286. 
Korhonen K, Leinonen T, Tarkiainen L, Einio E, Martikainen P. Childhood socio-economic circumstances 
and dementia: prospective register-based cohort study of adulthood socio-economic and cardiovascular health 
mediators. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2022. 
287. 
Deckers K, Cadar D, van Boxtel MPJ, Verhey FRJ, Steptoe A, Kohler S. Modifiable Risk Factors Explain 
Socioeconomic Inequalities in Dementia Risk: Evidence from a Population-Based Prospective Cohort Study. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2019;71(2):549-57. 
Raggi M, Dugravot A, Valeri L, Machado-Fragua MD, Dumurgier J, Kivimaki M, et al. Contribution of 
288. 
smoking towards the association between socioeconomic position and dementia: 32-year follow-up of the 
Whitehall II prospective cohort study. Lancet Reg Health-Eu. 2022;23. 
289. 
role of quasi‐experimental studies. Alzheimer's & Dementia. 2023. 
290.  Marteau TM, White M, Rutter H, Petticrew M, Mytton OT, McGowan JG, Aldridge RW. Increasing 
healthy life expectancy equitably in England by 5 years by 2035: could it be achieved? Lancet. 
2019;393(10191):2571-3. 
291. 
purchases following restrictions on the advertisement of high fat, salt, and sugar products across the Transport 
for London network: A controlled interrupted time series analysis. Plos Med. 2022;19(2). 
292. 
2014;13(10):1017-28. 
293. 
impairment/dementia and cognitive decline: a dose-response meta-analysis of observational studies. Aging Clin 
Exp Res. 2019;31(3):309-20. 
294.  Ma YJ, Liang LR, Zheng FF, Shi L, Zhong BL, Xie WX. Association Between Sleep Duration and Cognitive 
Decline. Jama Netw Open. 2020;3(9). 
295. 
analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2019;20(12):1480-7 e5. 
296. 
associated with late life cognitive function. Sleep. 2013;36(10):1533-41, 41A. 
297. 
and incidence of dementia in ageing men. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2017;71(4):329-35. 
298. 
Lutsey PL, Misialek JR, Mosley TH, Gottesman RF, Punjabi NM, Shahar E, et al. Sleep characteristics and 
risk of dementia and Alzheimer's disease: The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study. Alzheimers Dement. 
2018;14(2):157-66. 
299. 
Bokenberger K, Strom P, Dahl Aslan AK, Johansson AL, Gatz M, Pedersen NL, Akerstedt T. Association 
Between Sleep Characteristics and Incident Dementia Accounting for Baseline Cognitive Status: A Prospective 
Population-Based Study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2017;72(1):134-9. 
300. 
Study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;66(2):579-86. 

Larsson SC, Wolk A. The Role of Lifestyle Factors and Sleep Duration for Late-Onset Dementia: A Cohort 

Yaffe K, Falvey CM, Hoang T. Connections between sleep and cognition in older adults. Lancet Neurol. 

Luojus MK, Lehto SM, Tolmunen T, Brem AK, Lonnroos E, Kauhanen J. Self-reported sleep disturbance 

Yau A, Berger N, Law CJ, Cornelsen L, Greener R, Adams J, et al. Changes in household food and drink 

Liang Y, Qu LB, Liu H. Non-linear associations between sleep duration and the risks of mild cognitive 

Virta JJ, Heikkila K, Perola M, Koskenvuo M, Raiha I, Rinne JO, Kaprio J. Midlife sleep characteristics 

Fan L, Xu W, Cai Y, Hu Y, Wu C. Sleep Duration and the Risk of Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-

77 

Lucchetta RC, da Mata BPM, Mastroianni PD. Association between Development of Dementia and Use of 

Goel N, Rao H, Durmer JS, Dinges DF. Neurocognitive consequences of sleep deprivation. Semin Neurol. 

Sabia S, Dugravot A, Leger D, Ben Hassen C, Kivimaki M, Singh-Manoux A. Association of sleep duration 

Fjell AM, Sorensen O, Wang YP, Amlien IK, Baaré WFC, Bartrés-Faz D, et al. No phenotypic or genotypic 

Leso V, Caturano A, Vetrani I, Iavicoli I. Shift or night shift work and dementia risk: a systematic review. 

Paz V, Dashti HS, Garfield V. Is there an association between daytime napping, cognitive function, and 

Sabia S, Fayosse A, Dumurgier J, van Hees VT, Paquet C, Sommerlad A, et al. Association of sleep 

Gray SL, Dublin S, Yu O, Walker R, Anderson M, Hubbard RA, et al. Benzodiazepine use and risk of 

Liao H, Pan D, Deng Z, Jiang J, Cai J, Liu Y, et al. Association of shift work with incident dementia: a 

Guay-Gagnon M, Vat S, Forget MF, Tremblay-Gravel M, Ducharme S, Nguyen QD, Desmarais P. Sleep 

301. 
at age 50, 60, and 70 years with risk of multimorbidity in the UK: 25-year follow-up of the Whitehall II cohort 
study. Plos Med. 2022;19(10):e1004109. 
302. 
evidence for a link between sleep duration and brain atrophy. Nature Human Behaviour. 2023. 
303. 
duration in middle and old age with incidence of dementia. Nat Commun. 2021;12(1):2289. 
304. 
Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2021;25(1):222-32. 
305. 
community-based cohort study. Bmc Med. 2022;20(1):484. 
306.  Wong ATY, Reeves GK, Floud S. Total sleep duration and daytime napping in relation to dementia 
detection risk: Results from the Million Women Study. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2023. 
307. 
brain volume? A Mendelian randomization study in the UK Biobank. Sleep Health. 2023. 
308. 
apnea and the risk of dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sleep Res. 2022;31(5):e13589. 
309. 
Benzodiazepines: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Pharmacotherapy. 2018;38(10):1010-20. 
310. 
incident dementia or cognitive decline: prospective population based study. BMJ. 2016;352:i90. 
311. 
2009;29(4):320-39. 
312. 
impairment of learning and memory. Neurobiol Dis. 2012;48(3):348-55. 
313.  McAlpine CS, Kiss MG, Rattik S, He S, Vassalli A, Valet C, et al. Sleep modulates haematopoiesis and 
protects against atherosclerosis. Nature. 2019;566(7744):383-7. 
314. 
Sleep Behavior Disorder in Overt Alpha-Synucleinopathies. Ann Neurol. 2021;89(2):293-303. 
315. 
deposition in community-dwelling older adults. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70(12):1537-43. 
316.  Ooms S, Overeem S, Besse K, Rikkert MO, Verbeek M, Claassen JA. Effect of 1 night of total sleep 
deprivation on cerebrospinal fluid beta-amyloid 42 in healthy middle-aged men: a randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Neurol. 2014;71(8):971-7. 
317. 
of CNS health biomarkers in young men. Neurology. 2020;94(11):e1181-e9. 
318. 
human brain after one night of sleep deprivation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018;115(17):4483-8. 
319. 
Rev Neurol. 2014;10(2):115-9. 
320.  Musiek ES, Xiong DD, Holtzman DM. Sleep, circadian rhythms, and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer 
disease. Exp Mol Med. 2015;47:e148. 
321.  Musiek ES, Bhimasani M, Zangrilli MA, Morris JC, Holtzman DM, Ju YS. Circadian Rest-Activity Pattern 
Changes in Aging and Preclinical Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Neurol. 2018;75(5):582-90. 
322. 
dementia prevention: recommendations of the Nutrition for Dementia Prevention Working Group. Lancet 
Healthy Longev. 2022;3(7):e501-e12. 

Yassine HN, Samieri C, Livingston G, Glass K, Wagner M, Tangney C, et al. Nutrition state of science and 

Ju YE, Lucey BP, Holtzman DM. Sleep and Alzheimer disease pathology--a bidirectional relationship. Nat 

Zhu B, Dong Y, Xu Z, Gompf HS, Ward SA, Xue Z, et al. Sleep disturbance induces neuroinflammation and 

Stang CD, Mullan AF, Hajeb M, Camerucci E, Turcano P, Martin P, et al. Timeline of Rapid Eye Movement 

Shokri-Kojori E, Wang GJ, Wiers CE, Demiral SB, Guo M, Kim SW, et al. beta-Amyloid accumulation in the 

Spira AP, Gamaldo AA, An Y, Wu MN, Simonsick EM, Bilgel M, et al. Self-reported sleep and beta-amyloid 

Benedict C, Blennow K, Zetterberg H, Cedernaes J. Effects of acute sleep loss on diurnal plasma dynamics 

78 

Liu YH, Gao X, Na M, Kris-Etherton PM, Mitchell DC, Jensen GL. Dietary Pattern, Diet Quality, and 

Shannon OM, Ranson JM, Gregory S, Macpherson H, Milte C, Lentjes M, et al. Mediterranean diet 

Goncalves NG, Ferreira NV, Khandpur N, Steele EM, Levy RB, Lotufo PA, et al. Association Between 

Chen H, Dhana K, Huang YH, Huang LY, Tao Y, Liu XR, et al. Association of the Mediterranean Dietary 

Glans I, Sonestedt E, Nagga K, Gustavsson AM, Gonzalez-Padilla E, Borne Y, et al. Association Between 

Thomas A, Baillet M, Proust-Lima C, Feart C, Foubert-Samier A, Helmer C, et al. Blood polyunsaturated 

Townsend RF, Logan D, O'Neill RF, Prinelli F, Woodside JV, McEvoy CT. Whole Dietary Patterns, Cognitive 

323. 
Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies. J Alzheimers Dis. 
2020;78(1):151-68. 
324. 
Approaches to Stop Hypertension Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) Diet With the Risk of 
Dementia. Jama Psychiatry. 2023. 
325. 
Decline and Cognitive Disorders: A Systematic Review of Prospective and Intervention Studies. Nutrients. 
2023;15(2). 
326. 
Dietary Habits in Midlife With Dementia Incidence Over a 20-Year Period. Neurology. 2023;100(1):e28-e37. 
327. 
adherence is associated with lower dementia risk, independent of genetic predisposition: findings from the UK 
Biobank prospective cohort study. Bmc Med. 2023;21(1). 
328. 
Agarwal P, Leurgans SE, Agrawal S, Aggarwal N, Cherian LJ, James BD, et al. Association of 
Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay and Mediterranean Diets With Alzheimer 
Disease Pathology. Neurology. 2023. 
329. 
Cardoso BR, Machado P, Steele EM. Association between ultra-processed food consumption and 
cognitive performance in US older adults: a cross-sectional analysis of the NHANES 2011-2014. Eur J Nutr. 
2022;61(8):3975-85. 
330. 
Consumption of Ultraprocessed Foods and Cognitive Decline. Jama Neurology. 2023;80(2):142-50. 
331. 
omega-3 fatty acids, brain atrophy, cognitive decline, and dementia risk. Alzheimers & Dementia. 
2021;17(3):407-16. 
332. 
2018;55(11):8243-50. 
333. 
Cognitive Decline in Older Persons. N Engl J Med. 2023. 
334. 
Baker LD, Manson JE, Rapp SR, Sesso HD, Gaussoin SA, Shumaker SA, Espeland MA. Effects of cocoa 
extract and a multivitamin on cognitive function: A randomized clinical trial. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2022. 
335. 
hippocampal-dependent memory in older adults with lower diet quality and lower habitual flavanol 
consumption. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023;120(23):e2216932120. 
336. 
Controlled Study of Purified Anthocyanins on Cognition in Individuals at Increased Risk for Dementia. Am J Geriat 
Psychiat. 2023;31(2):141-51. 
337. 
diseases and the risk of dementia: a large, multicohort, observational study with a replication cohort. Lancet 
Infect Dis. 2021;21(11):1557-67. 
338. 
Hospitalization With Infection Among Adults in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study Cohort. 
Jama Netw Open. 2023;6(1):e2250126. 
339.  Walker KA, Gottesman RF, Wu AZ, Knopman DS, Mosley TH, Alonso A, et al. Association of 
Hospitalization, Critical Illness, and Infection with Brain Structure in Older Adults. Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society. 2018;66(10):1919-26. 

Brickman AM, Yeung LK, Alschuler DM, Ottaviani JI, Kuhnle GGC, Sloan RP, et al. Dietary flavanols restore 

Bohn B, Lutsey PL, Misialek JR, Walker KA, Brown CH, Hughes TM, et al. Incidence of Dementia Following 

Sipila PN, Heikkila N, Lindbohm JV, Hakulinen C, Vahtera J, Elovainio M, et al. Hospital-treated infectious 

Lin L, Zheng LJ, Zhang LJ. Neuroinflammation, Gut Microbiome, and Alzheimer's Disease. Mol Neurobiol. 

Barnes LL, Dhana K, Liu X, Carey VJ, Ventrelle J, Johnson K, et al. Trial of the MIND Diet for Prevention of 

Aarsland D, Khalifa K, Bergland AK, Soennesyn H, Oppedal K, Holteng LBA, et al. A Randomised Placebo-

79 

Darweesh SKL, Wolters FJ, Ikram MA, de Wolf F, Bos D, Hofman A. Inflammatory markers and the risk of 

Huang SY, Yang YX, Kuo K, Li HQ, Shen XN, Chen SD, et al. Herpesvirus infections and Alzheimer's 

Douaud G, Lee S, Alfaro-Almagro F, Arthofer C, Wang CY, McCarthy P, et al. SARS-CoV-2 is associated 

Levine KS, Leonard HL, Blauwendraat C, Iwaki H, Johnson N, Bandres-Ciga S, et al. Virus exposure and 

Singh-Manoux A, Dugravot A, Brunner E, Kumari M, Shipley M, Elbaz A, Kivimaki M. Interleukin-6 and C-

Crivelli L, Palmer K, Calandri I, Guekht A, Beghi E, Carroll W, et al. Changes in cognitive functioning after 

340.  Muzambi R, Bhaskaran K, Smeeth L, Brayne C, Chaturvedi N, Warren-Gash C. Assessment of common 
infections and incident dementia using UK primary and secondary care data: a historical cohort study. Lancet 
Health Longev. 2021;2(7):E426-E35. 
341. 
neurodegenerative disease risk across national biobanks. Neuron. 2023. 
342. 
disease: a Mendelian randomization study. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021;13(1):158. 
Duggan MR, Peng ZS, An Y, Triolo MHK, Shafer AT, Davatzikos C, et al. Herpes Viruses in the Baltimore 
343. 
Longitudinal Study of Aging Associations With Brain Volumes, Cognitive Performance, and Plasma Biomarkers. 
Neurology. 2022;99(18):E2014-E24. 
344.  Warren-Gash C, Cadogan SL, Nicholas JM, Breuer JM, Shah D, Pearce N, et al. Herpes simplex virus and 
rates of cognitive decline or whole brain atrophy in the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network. Ann Clin 
Transl Neur. 2022;9(11):1727-38. 
345. 
dementia and Alzheimer's disease: A meta-analysis. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2018;14(11):1450-9. 
346. 
reactive protein as predictors of cognitive decline in late midlife. Neurology. 2014;83(6):486-93. 
347. 
COVID-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2022;18(5):1047-66. 
348. 
with changes in brain structure in UK Biobank. Nature. 2022;604(7907):697-+. 
349.  Ochi S, So M, Hashimoto S, Hashimoto Y, Sekizawa Y. Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on exercise 
habits and overweight status in Japan: A nation-wide panel survey. PLOS Glob Public Health. 
2023;3(7):e0001732. 
350. 
Alzheimer disease - a research prospectus. Nat Rev Neurol. 2021. 
351. 
Rev Immunol. 2021;21(8):526-41. 
352. 
gene expression signature by aging and neurodegenerative conditions: a co-expression meta-analysis. Acta 
Neuropathol Commun. 2015;3:31. 
353. 
T cells drive compartmentalized and chronic autoimmune damage against CNS neurons. Sci Transl Med. 
2022;14(640):eabl6157. 
354. 
cells cooperate with CD4(+) T cells to drive compartmentalized immunopathology in the CNS. Sci Transl Med. 
2022;14(640):eabl6058. 
355.  Wendeln AC, Degenhardt K, Kaurani L, Gertig M, Ulas T, Jain G, et al. Innate immune memory in the 
brain shapes neurological disease hallmarks. Nature. 2018;556(7701):332-8. 
356. 
Disease and Back. Physiol Rev. 2019;99(1):21-78. 
357. 
to systemic inflammation in an Alzheimer disease mouse model. Neurobiol Aging. 2013;34(8):2064-70. 
358. 
359.  Wu X, Yang H, He S, Xia T, Chen D, Zhou Y, et al. Adult vaccination as a protective factor for dementia: a 
meta-analysis and systematic review of population-based observational studies. Frontiers in Immunology. 
2022;13:872542. 

Bettcher BM, Tansey MG, Dorothee G, Heneka MT. Peripheral and central immune system crosstalk in 

Holtman IR, Raj DD, Miller JA, Schaafsma W, Yin Z, Brouwer N, et al. Induction of a common microglia 

Salvador AF, de Lima KA, Kipnis J. Neuromodulation by the immune system: a focus on cytokines. Nat 

Sweeney MD, Zhao Z, Montagne A, Nelson AR, Zlokovic BV. Blood-Brain Barrier: From Physiology to 

Frieser D, Pignata A, Khajavi L, Shlesinger D, Gonzalez-Fierro C, Nguyen XH, et al. Tissue-resident CD8(+) 

Iadecola C. The Pathobiology of Vascular Dementia. Neuron. 2013;80(4):844-66. 

Takeda S, Sato N, Ikimura K, Nishino H, Rakugi H, Morishita R. Increased blood-brain barrier vulnerability 

Vincenti I, Page N, Steinbach K, Yermanos A, Lemeille S, Nunez N, et al. Tissue-resident memory CD8(+) T 

80 

Hajishengallis G, Chavakis T. Local and systemic mechanisms linking periodontal disease and 

Douros A, Ante Z, Suissa S, Brassard P. Common Vaccines and the Risk of Incident Dementia: A 

Beydoun MA, Beydoun HA, Hossain S, El-Hajj ZW, Weiss J, Zonderman AB. Clinical and Bacterial Markers 

Holmer J, Eriksdotter M, Habel H, Hed Myrberg I, Jonsson A, Pussinen PJ, et al. Periodontal conditions 

Thomson WM, Barak Y. Tooth Loss and Dementia: A Critical Examination. J Dent Res. 2021;100(3):226-

Alzheimer's Disease Anti-inflammatory Prevention Trial Research G. Results of a follow-up study to the 

Yu JT, Xu W, Tan CC, Andrieu S, Suckling J, Evangelou E, et al. Evidence-based prevention of Alzheimer's 

360. 
Population-based Cohort Study. J Infect Dis. 2023;227(11):1227-36. 
361. 
disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of 243 observational prospective studies and 153 randomised 
controlled trials. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2020;91(11):1201-9. 
362. 
randomized Alzheimer's Disease Anti-inflammatory Prevention Trial (ADAPT). Alzheimers Dement. 
2013;9(6):714-23. 
363.  Meyer PF, Tremblay-Mercier J, Leoutsakos J, Madjar C, Lafaille-Maignan ME, Savard M, et al. INTREPAD: 
A randomized trial of naproxen to slow progress of presymptomatic Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 
2019;92(18):e2070-e80. 
Howard R, Zubko O, Bradley R, Harper E, Pank L, O'Brien J, et al. Minocycline at 2 Different Dosages vs 
364. 
Placebo for Patients With Mild Alzheimer Disease A Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama Neurology. 2020;77(2):164-
74. 
365. 
inflammatory comorbidities. Nat Rev Immunol. 2021;21(7):426-40. 
366. 
31. 
367. 
and incident dementia: A nationwide Swedish cohort study. J Periodontol. 2022;93(9):1378-86. 
368. 
of Periodontitis and Their Association with Incident All-Cause and Alzheimer's Disease Dementia in a Large 
National Survey. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;75(1):157-72. 
369. 
review and meta-analysis. Psychol Med. 2022. 
370. 
Dementia in Persons With Schizophrenia: A Danish Population-Based Cohort Study. JAMA Psychiatry. 
2015;72(11):1095-101. 
371. 
population-based cohort study in Taiwan. Eur Psychiatry. 2018;53:7-16. 
372. 
Disorders With Dementia: 30-Year Analysis of 1.7 Million New Zealand Citizens. JAMA Psychiatry. 
2022;79(4):333-40. 
373. 
Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2010;12(3):409-15. 
374. 
throughout adulthood and illness stages in individuals with psychotic disorders and their unaffected siblings. 
Mol Psychiatry. 2021;26(8):4529-43. 
375. 
neurodegenerative diseases in elderly patients with schizophrenia: a postmortem neuropathologic study of 100 
cases. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1998;55(3):205-11. 
Hagi K, Nosaka T, Dickinson D, Lindenmayer JP, Lee J, Friedman J, et al. Association Between 
376. 
Cardiovascular Risk Factors and Cognitive Impairment in People With Schizophrenia A Systematic Review and 
Meta-analysis. Jama Psychiatry. 2021;78(5):510-8. 
377. 
Ballester PL, Romano MT, de Azevedo Cardoso T, Hassel S, Strother SC, Kennedy SH, Frey BN. Brain age 
in mood and psychotic disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2022;145(1):42-
55. 

El Miniawi S, Orgeta V, Stafford J. Non-affective psychotic disorders and risk of dementia: a systematic 

Purohit DP, Perl DP, Haroutunian V, Powchik P, Davidson M, Davis KL. Alzheimer disease and related 

Richmond-Rakerd LS, D'Souza S, Milne BJ, Caspi A, Moffitt TE. Longitudinal Associations of Mental 

Velthorst E, Mollon J, Murray RM, de Haan L, Germeys IM, Glahn DC, et al. Cognitive functioning 

Ribe AR, Laursen TM, Charles M, Katon W, Fenger-Gron M, Davydow D, et al. Long-term Risk of 

Lin CE, Chung CH, Chen LF, Chi MJ. Increased risk of dementia in patients with Schizophrenia: A 

Andreasen NC. The lifetime trajectory of schizophrenia and the concept of neurodevelopment. 

81 

Demnitz-King H, Saba L, Lau Y, Munns L, Zabihi S, Schlosser M, et al. Association between anxiety 

Fu CY, Hao WT, Shrestha N, Virani SS, Mishra SR, Zhu DS. Association of reproductive factors with 

Jonas K, Abi-Dargham A, Kotov R. Two Hypotheses on the High Incidence of Dementia in Psychotic 

Stott J, Saunders R, Desai R, Bell G, Fearn C, Buckman JEJ, et al. Associations between psychological 

Liou YJ, Tsai SJ, Bai YM, Chen TJ, Chen MH. Dementia risk in middle-aged patients with schizophrenia, 

Gunak MM, Billings J, Carratu E, Marchant NL, Favarato G, Orgeta V. Post-traumatic stress disorder as a 

Kootar S, Huque MH, Arthur R, Mortby M, Anstey KJ. Association Between Anxiety and Cognitive Decline 

378. 
Disorders. Jama Psychiatry. 2021;78(12):1305-6. 
379. 
Stafford J, Dykxhoorn J, Sommerlad A, Dalman C, Kirkbride JB, Howard R. Association between risk of 
dementia and very late-onset schizophrenia-like psychosis: a Swedish population-based cohort study. Psychol 
Med. 2021:1-9. 
380. 
bipolar disorder, and major depressive disorder: a cohort study of 84,824 subjects. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin 
Neurosci. 2023;273(1):219-27. 
381. 
Over 12 Years in a Population-Based Cohort. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;84(1):409-18. 
382. 
intervention for anxiety disorders and risk of dementia: a prospective cohort study using national health-care 
records data in England. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2023;4(1):e12-e22. 
383. 
symptoms and Alzheimer's disease biomarkers in cognitively healthy adults: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Psychosom Res. 2023;166:111159. 
384. 
risk factor for dementia: systematic review and meta-analysis (Sept, 10.1192/bjp.2020.150, 2020). Brit J 
Psychiat. 2021;218(3):174-. 
385.  Weiner MW, Harvey D, Landau SM, Veitch DP, Neylan TC, Grafman JH, et al. Traumatic brain injury and 
post-traumatic stress disorder are not associated with Alzheimer's disease pathology measured with biomarkers. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2022. 
386. 
dementia: A systematic review and dose-response meta-analyses of observational studies. Eclinicalmedicine. 
2022;43. 
387. 
Risk of Dementia A Nationwide Cohort Study. Neurology. 2022;99(17):E1835-E42. 
388. 
therapy and risk of dementia: nested case-control studies using QResearch and CPRD databases. BMJ. 
2021;374:n2182. 
389. 
dementia: nationwide, nested case-control study. BMJ. 2023;381:e072770. 
390. 
function in healthy postmenopausal women: a meta-analysis of 23 randomized controlled trials. 
Psychogeriatrics. 2021;21(6):926-38. 
391. 
Ben Hassen C, Fayosse A, Landre B, Raggi M, Bloomberg M, Sabia S, Singh-Manoux A. Association 
between age at onset of multimorbidity and incidence of dementia: 30 year follow-up in Whitehall II prospective 
cohort study. Bmj-Brit Med J. 2022;376. 
392. 
Clusters, and Modification by Genetic Factors With Risk of Dementia. Jama Netw Open. 2022;5(9):e2232124. 
393.  O’Caoimh R, Sezgin D, O’Donovan MR, Molloy DW, Clegg A, Rockwood K, Liew A. Prevalence of frailty in 
62 countries across the world: a systematic review and meta-analysis of population-level studies. Age Ageing. 
2021;50(1):96-104. 
394. 
clinical expression of neuropsychological deficits in older adults. Eur J Neurol. 2024;31(1). 
395.  Ward DD, Wallace LMK, Rockwood K. Cumulative health deficits, APOE genotype, and risk for later-life 
mild cognitive impairment and dementia. J Neurol Neurosur Ps. 2021;92(2):136-42. 

Vinogradova Y, Dening T, Hippisley-Cox J, Taylor L, Moore M, Coupland C. Use of menopausal hormone 

Zhou HH, Yu Z, Luo L, Xie F, Wang Y, Wan Z. The effect of hormone replacement therapy on cognitive 

Sung YF, Tsai CT, Kuo CY, Lee JT, Chou CH, Chen YC, et al. Use of Hormone Replacement Therapy and 

Canevelli M, Wallace LMK, Bruno G, Cesari M, Rockwood K, Ward DD. Frailty is associated with the 

Calvin CM, Conroy MC, Moore SF, Kuzma E, Littlejohns TJ. Association of Multimorbidity, Disease 

Pourhadi N, Morch LS, Holm EA, Torp-Pedersen C, Meaidi A. Menopausal hormone therapy and 

82 

Prince M, Bryce R, Ferri CP. World Alzheimer Report 2011: The benefits of early diagnosis and 

Parker M, Barlow S, Hoe J, Aitken L. Persistent barriers and facilitators to seeking help for a dementia 

Fowler NR, Perkins AJ, Gao S, Sachs GA, Boustani MA. Risks and Benefits of Screening for Dementia in 

Canevelli M, Arisi I, Bacigalupo I, Arighi A, Galimberti D, Vanacore N, et al. Biomarkers and phenotypic 

Siggaard T, Reguant R, Jorgensen IF, Haue AD, Lademann M, Aguayo-Orozco A, et al. Disease trajectory 

396. 
browser for exploring temporal, population-wide disease progression patterns in 7.2 million Danish patients. Nat 
Commun. 2020;11(1):4952. 
397.  Nedelec T, Couvy-Duchesne B, Monnet F, Daly T, Ansart M, Gantzer L, et al. Identifying health conditions 
associated with Alzheimer's disease up to 15 years before diagnosis: an agnostic study of French and British 
health records. Lancet Digit Health. 2022;4(3):E169-E78. 
398.  Wallace L, Hunter S, Theou O, Fleming J, Rockwood K, Brayne C. Frailty and neuropathology in relation 
to dementia status: the Cambridge City over-75s Cohort study. International Psychogeriatrics. 2021;33(10):1035-
43. 
399. 
expression in Alzheimer's disease: exploring the contribution of frailty in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative. Geroscience. 2021;43(2):1039-51. 
400.  Ward DD, Ranson JM, Wallace LMK, Llewellyn DJ, Rockwood K. Frailty, lifestyle, genetics and dementia 
risk. J Neurol Neurosur Ps. 2022;93(4):343-50. 
401. 
intervention. London; 2011 11 AD. 
402. 
Primary Care: The Indiana University Cognitive Health Outcomes Investigation of the Comparative Effectiveness 
of Dementia Screening (IU CHOICE)Trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2020;68(3):535-43. 
403. 
diagnosis: a systematic review of 30 years of the perspectives of carers and people with dementia. Int 
Psychogeriatr. 2020:1-24. 
404.  Nwakasi CC, de Medeiros K, Bosun-Arije FS. "We Are Doing These Things So That People Will Not Laugh 
at Us": Caregivers' Attitudes About Dementia and Caregiving in Nigeria. Qual Health Res. 2021;31(8):1448-58. 
405. 
Jia L, Quan M, Fu Y, Zhao T, Li Y, Wei C, et al. Dementia in China: epidemiology, clinical management, 
and research advances. Lancet Neurol. 2020;19(1):81-92. 
406. 
43. 
407. 
Income and Low-Literacy Settings: Validation of the Tablet-Based Oxford Cognitive Screen in the Health and 
Aging in Africa: A Longitudinal Study of an INDEPTH Community in South Africa (HAALSI). J Gerontol B Psychol Sci 
Soc Sci. 2017;72(1):38-50. 
408.  Magklara E, Stephan BCM, Robinson L. Current approaches to dementia screening and case finding in 
low- and middle-income countries: Research update and recommendations. Int J Geriatr Psych. 2019;34(1):3-7. 
409. 
incidence of dementia among older adults. Jama. 2022;327(15):1488-95. 
410.  Mayeda ER, Glymour MM, Quesenberry CP, Whitmer RA. Inequalities in dementia incidence between six 
racial and ethnic groups over 14 years. Alzheimer's & Dementia. 2016;12(3):216-24. 
411.  Naaheed Mukadam LM, Gemma Lewis, Rohini Mathur, Greta Rait, Gill Livingston. Incidence, age at 
diagnosis and survival with dementia across ethnic groups in England: A longitudinal study using electronic 
health records. Alzheimer's and Dementia. 2022;epub. 
412. 
413. 
American Geriatrics Society. 1992;40(9):922-35. 
414.  Naqvi RM, Haider S, Tomlinson G, Alibhai S. Cognitive assessments in multicultural populations using the 
Rowland Universal Dementia Assessment Scale: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ. 
2015;187(5):E169-E75. 

El Alaoui-Faris M, Federico A, Grisold W. Neurology in Migrants and Refugees: Springer; 2021. 
Tombaugh TN, McIntyre NJ. The mini‐mental state examination: a comprehensive review. Journal of the 

Humphreys GW, Duta MD, Montana L, Demeyere N, McCrory C, Rohr J, et al. Cognitive Function in Low-

Rewerska-Jusko M, Rejdak K. Social Stigma of People with Dementia. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;78(4):1339-

Kornblith E, Bahorik A, Boscardin WJ, Xia F, Barnes DE, Yaffe K. Association of race and ethnicity with 

83 

Kourtis LC, Regele OB, Wright JM, Jones GB. Digital biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease: the 

Geldmacher DS, Kirson NY, Birnbaum HG, Eapen S, Kantor E, Cummings AK, Joish VN. Implications of 

Prince MC-H, A, Knapp, M. Guerchet, M. Karagiannidou, M. World Alzheimer report 2016: Improving 

Dubois B, Padovani A, Scheltens P, Rossi A, Dell'Agnello G. Timely Diagnosis for Alzheimer's Disease: A 

Gunak MM, Barnes DE, Yaffe K, Li Y, Byers AL. Risk of Suicide Attempt in Patients With Recent Diagnosis 

Banerjee S, Wittenberg R. Clinical and cost effectiveness of services for early diagnosis and intervention 

Thabtah F, Peebles D, Retzler J, Hathurusingha C. A review of dementia screening tools based on mobile 

Robinson L, Gemski A, Abley C, Bond J, Keady J, Campbell S, et al. The transition to dementia - individual 

Aldus CF, Arthur A, Dennington-Price A, Millac P, Richmond P, Dening T, et al.  Undiagnosed dementia in 

415. 
healthcare for people living with dementia. Coverage, quality and costs now and in the future. London: 
Alzheimer’s Disease International; 2016. 
416. 
primary care: a record linkage study. Health Services and Delivery Research. Southampton (UK)2020. 
417. 
and family experiences of receiving a diagnosis: a review. International Psychogeriatrics. 2011;23(7):1026-43. 
418. 
in dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009;24(7):748-54. 
419. 
Literature Review on Benefits and Challenges. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016;49(3):617-31. 
420.  Weimer DL, Sager MA. Early identification and treatment of Alzheimer's disease: Social and fiscal 
outcomes. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2009;5(3):215-26. 
421. 
early treatment among Medicaid patients with Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2014;10(2):214-24. 
Brayne C, Kelly S. Against the stream: early diagnosis of dementia, is it so desirable? Bjpsych Bull. 
422. 
2019;43(3):123-5. 
423. 
of Mild Cognitive Impairment or Dementia. JAMA Psychiatry. 2021;78(6):659-66. 
424. 
mobile/wearable devices opportunity. NPJ digital medicine. 2019;2(1):9. 
425. 
application. Health and Technology. 2020;10:1011-22. 
426. 
A systematic review with a new mapping model. Journal of Biomedical Informatics. 2020;111:103573. 
427. 
Framework: Toward a biological definition of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2018;14(4):535-62. 
428. 
Jack CR, Jr., Bennett DA, Blennow K, Carrillo MC, Feldman HH, Frisoni GB, et al. A/T/N: An unbiased 
descriptive classification scheme for Alzheimer disease biomarkers. Neurology. 2016;87(5):539-47. 
429. 
for preclinical disease. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2018;14(8):981-8. 
430.  Wittens MMJ, Sima DM, Houbrechts R, Ribbens A, Niemantsverdriet E, Fransen E, et al. Diagnostic 
Performance of Automated MRI Volumetry by icobrain dm for Alzheimer's Disease in a Clinical Setting: A 
REMEMBER Study. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;83(2):623-39. 
431.  McDade E, Llibre-Guerra JJ, Holtzman DM, Morris JC, Bateman RJ. The informed road map to prevention 
of Alzheimer Disease: A call to arms. Molecular Neurodegeneration. 2021;16(1):49. 
432.  McDade E, Bednar MM, Brashear HR, Miller DS, Maruff P, Randolph C, et al. The pathway to secondary 
prevention of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions. 
2020;6(1):e12069. 
433. 
Salvado G, Larsson V, Cody KA, Cullen NC, Jonaitis EM, Stomrud E, et al. Optimal combinations of CSF 
biomarkers for predicting cognitive decline and clinical conversion in cognitively unimpaired participants and 
mild cognitive impairment patients: A multi-cohort study. Alzheimers Dement. 2023;19(7):2943-55. 
434.  Wojdala AL, Bellomo G, Gaetani L, Toja A, Chipi E, Shan D, et al. Trajectories of CSF and plasma 
biomarkers across Alzheimer's disease continuum: disease staging by NF-L, p-tau181, and GFAP. Neurobiol Dis. 
2023;189:106356. 
435. 
Alzheimer's Disease. New England Journal of Medicine. 2024;390(8):712-22. 

Brookmeyer R, Abdalla N. Estimation of lifetime risks of Alzheimer's disease dementia using biomarkers 

Jia JP, Ning YY, Chen ML, Wang SH, Yang H, Li FY, et al. Biomarker Changes during 20 Years Preceding 

Jack CR, Jr., Bennett DA, Blennow K, Carrillo MC, Dunn B, Haeberlein SB, et al. NIA-AA Research 

Thabtah F, Peebles D, Retzler J, Hathurusingha C. Dementia medical screening using mobile applications: 

84 

Jack CR, Therneau TM, Weigand SD, Wiste HJ, Knopman DS, Vemuri P, et al. Prevalence of Biologically vs 

Simuni T, Chahine LM, Poston K, Brumm M, Buracchio T, Campbell M, et al. A biological definition of 

Burke BT, Latimer C, Keene CD, Sonnen JA, McCormick W, Bowen JD, et al. Theoretical impact of the 

Fairfoul G, McGuire LI, Pal S, Ironside JW, Neumann J, Christie S, et al. Alpha-synuclein RT-QuIC in the 

Jansen WJ, Janssen O, Tijms BM, Vos SJB, Ossenkoppele R, Visser PJ, Grp ABS. Prevalence Estimates of 

436. 
CSF of patients with alpha-synucleinopathies. Ann Clin Transl Neur. 2016;3(10):812-8. 
437. 
neuronal alpha-synuclein disease: towards an integrated staging system for research. Lancet Neurol. 
2024;23(2):178-90. 
438. 
Grossauer A, Hemicker G, Krismer F, Peball M, Djamshidian A, Poewe W, et al. α-Synuclein Seed 
Amplification Assays in the Diagnosis of Synucleinopathies Using Cerebrospinal Fluid-A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis. Mov Disord Clin Prac. 2023;10(5):737-47. 
439. 
Amyloid Abnormality Across the Alzheimer Disease Clinical Spectrum. Jama Neurology. 2022;79(3):228-43. 
440. 
Clinically Defined Alzheimer Spectrum Entities Using the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association 
Research Framework. Jama Neurology. 2019;76(10):1174-83. 
441. 
AT(N) framework on dementia using a community autopsy sample. Alzheimers Dement. 2021;17(12):1879-91. 
Gordon BA, Blazey TM, Christensen J, Dincer A, Flores S, Keefe S, et al. Tau PET in autosomal dominant 
442. 
Alzheimer’s disease: relationship with cognition, dementia and other biomarkers. Brain. 2019;142(4):1063-76. 
443. 
Jack CR, Wiste HJ, Botha H, Weigand SD, Therneau TM, Knopman DS, et al. The bivariate distribution of 
amyloid-beta and tau: relationship with established neurocognitive clinical syndromes. Brain. 
2019;142(10):3230-42. 
444.  Mattsson N, Cullen NC, Andreasson U, Zetterberg H, Blennow K. Association Between Longitudinal 
Plasma Neurofilament Light and Neurodegeneration in Patients With Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Neurology. 
2019;76(7):791-9. 
445.  Ossenkoppele R, Binette AP, Groot C, Smith R, Strandberg O, Palmqvist S, et al. Amyloid and tau PET-
positive cognitively unimpaired individuals are at high risk for future cognitive decline. Nature Medicine. 
2022;28(11):2381-+. 
Lindbohm JV, Mars N, Walker KA, Singh-Manoux A, Livingston G, Brunner EJ, et al. Plasma proteins, 
446. 
cognitive decline, and 20-year risk of dementia in the Whitehall II and Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
studies. Alzheimers Dement. 2022;18(4):612-24. 
447.  Walker KA, Chen J, Shi L, Yang Y, Fornage M, Zhou L, et al. Proteomics analysis of plasma from middle-
aged adults identifies protein markers of dementia risk in later life. Sci Transl Med. 2023;15(705):eadf5681. 
448. 
individual multidisease outcomes. Nature Medicine. 2022;28(11):2309-+. 
449. 
Brum WS, Cullen NC, Janelidze S, Ashton NJ, Zimmer ER, Therriault J, et al. A two-step workflow based 
on plasma p-tau217 to screen for amyloid β positivity with further confirmatory testing only in uncertain cases. 
Nature Aging. 2023. 
450. 
amyloid 42/40 predicts current and future brain amyloidosis. Neurology. 2019;93(17):e1647-e59. 
451.  Nakamura A, Kaneko N, Villemagne VL, Kato T, Doecke J, Doré V, et al. High performance plasma 
amyloid-β biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. Nature. 2018;554(7691):249-54. 
452. 
Janelidze S, Mattsson N, Palmqvist S, Smith R, Beach TG, Serrano GE, et al. Plasma P-tau181 in 
Alzheimer’s disease: relationship to other biomarkers, differential diagnosis, neuropathology and longitudinal 
progression to Alzheimer’s dementia. Nature Medicine. 2020;26(3):379-86. 
453. 
Palmqvist S, Janelidze S, Quiroz YT, Zetterberg H, Lopera F, Stomrud E, et al. Discriminative Accuracy of 
Plasma Phospho-tau217 for Alzheimer Disease vs Other Neurodegenerative Disorders. Jama. 2020;324(8):772-
81. 

Schindler SE, Bollinger JG, Ovod V, Mawuenyega KG, Li Y, Gordon BA, et al. High-precision plasma β-

Buergel T, Steinfeldt J, Ruyoga G, Pietzner M, Bizzarri D, Vojinovic D, et al. Metabolomic profiles predict 

85 

Sims JR, Zimmer JA, Evans CD, Lu M, Ardayfio P, Sparks J, et al. Donanemab in Early Symptomatic 

Gleason CE, Zuelsdorff M, Gooding DC, Kind AJH, Johnson AL, James TT, et al. Alzheimer's disease 

Ramanan VK, Graff-Radford J, Syrjanen J, Shir D, Algeciras-Schimnich A, Lucas J, et al. Association of 

Budd Haeberlein S, Aisen PS, Barkhof F, Chalkias S, Chen T, Cohen S, et al. Two Randomized Phase 3 

van Dyck CH, Swanson CJ, Aisen P, Bateman RJ, Chen C, Gee M, et al. Lecanemab in Early Alzheimer's 

Planche V, Bouteloup V, Pellegrin I, Mangin JF, Dubois B, Ousset PJ, et al. Validity and Performance of 

Chaudhry A, Rizig M. Comparing fluid biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease between African American or 

454.  Mila-Aloma M, Ashton NJ, Shekari M, Salvado G, Ortiz-Romero P, Montoliu-Gaya L, et al. Plasma p-
tau231 and p-tau217 as state markers of amyloid-beta pathology in preclinical Alzheimer's disease (Sep, 
10.1038/s41591-022-01925-w, 2022). Nature Medicine. 2022;28(9):1965-. 
455. 
Cullen NC, Leuzy A, Palmqvist S, Janelidze S, Stomrud E, Pesini P, et al. Individualized prognosis of 
cognitive decline and dementia in mild cognitive impairment based on plasma biomarker combinations. Nature 
Aging. 2021;1(1):114-23. 
456. 
Blood Biomarkers for Alzheimer Disease to Predict Dementia Risk in a Large Clinic-Based Cohort. Neurology. 
2023;100(5):e473-e84. 
457. 
Black African and white groups: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Neurol Sci. 2021;421:117270. 
458. 
biomarkers in Black and non-Hispanic White cohorts: A contextualized review of the evidence. Alzheimers & 
Dementia. 2022;18(8):1545-64. 
459. 
Plasma Biomarkers of Alzheimer Disease With Cognition and Medical Comorbidities in a Biracial Cohort. 
Neurology. 2023;101(14):e1402-e11. 
460. 
Disease. N Engl J Med. 2023;388(1):9-21. 
461. 
Studies of Aducanumab in Early Alzheimer's Disease. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2022;9(2):197-210. 
462. 
Alzheimer Disease: The TRAILBLAZER-ALZ 2 Randomized Clinical Trial. Jama. 2023;330(6):512-27. 
463. 
M. Boada, T. Grimmer,, A. Tamaoka RJP, R.S. Turner, D. Watson, M. Woodward, A. Thanasopoulou,, C. Lane MB, 
N.C. Fox, J.L. Cummings, P. Fontoura, and R.S. Doody,. Two Phase 3 Trials of Gantenerumab in Early Alzheimer’s 
Disease. N Engl J Med. 2023;389:1862-76. 
464.  Mintun MA, Lo AC, Duggan Evans C, Wessels AM, Ardayfio PA, Andersen SW, et al. Donanemab in Early 
Alzheimer’s Disease. New England Journal of Medicine. 2021;384(18):1691-704. 
465. 
screening for preclinical Alzheimer's disease in a British birth cohort at age 70. Brain. 2021;144(2):434-49. 
466. 
Association appropriate use recommendations for blood biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement. 
2022;18(12):2669-86. 
467. 
utility and clinical strategies. Nat Rev Neurol. 2021;17(1):23-36. 
468.  Qian J, Betensky RA, Hyman BT, Serrano-Pozo A. Association of APOE Genotype With Heterogeneity of 
Cognitive Decline Rate in Alzheimer Disease. Neurology. 2021;96(19):e2414-e28. 
469.  NICE guideline [NG97]: Dementia: assessment, management and support for people living with 
dementia and their carers. In: Health Do, editor. 2018. 
470. 
Current evidence, knowledge gaps, and future directions. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2022;18(4):790-809. 
471.  Mattap SM, Mohan D, McGrattan AM, Allotey P, Stephan BC, Reidpath DD, et al. The economic burden 
of dementia in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs): a systematic review. Bmj Glob Health. 2022;7(4). 
472. 
James T, Mukadam N, Sommerlad A, Ceballos SG, Livingston G. Culturally tailored therapeutic 
interventions for people affected by dementia: a systematic review and new conceptual model. Lancet Health 
Longev. 2021;2(3):E171-E9. 

Keshavan A, Pannee J, Karikari TK, Rodriguez JL, Ashton NJ, Nicholas JM, et al. Population-based blood 

Bateman RJDM, Delmar P, Abbas R, Salloway S. .Wojtowicz, K. Blennow, T. Bittner, S.E. Black, G. Klein, 

Koriath CAM, Kenny J, Ryan NS, Rohrer JD, Schott JM, Houlden H, et al. Genetic testing in dementia - 

Akinyemi RO, Yaria J, Ojagbemi A, Guerchet M, Okubadejo N, Njamnshi AK, et al. Dementia in Africa: 

Hansson O, Edelmayer RM, Boxer AL, Carrillo MC, Mielke MM, Rabinovici GD, et al. The Alzheimer's 

86 

Griner D, Smith TB. Culturally adapted mental health interventions: A meta-analytic review. 

Frost R, Walters K, Aw S, Brunskill G, Wilcock J, Robinson L, et al. Effectiveness of different post-

Llibre-Guerra JJ, Heavener A, Brucki SMD, Marante JPD, Pintado-Caipa M, Chen YH, et al. A call for 

Chowdhary N, Jotheeswaran AT, Nadkarni A, Hollon SD, King M, Jordans MJD, et al. The methods and 

Parker LJ, Marx KA, Nkimbeng M, Johnson E, Koeuth S, Gaugler JE, Gitlin LN. It's More Than Language: 

Collins RN, Kishita N. Prevalence of depression and burden among informal care-givers of people with 

Benish SG, Quintana S, Wampold BE. Culturally Adapted Psychotherapy and the Legitimacy of Myth: A 

473. 
Cultural Adaptation of a Proven Dementia Care Intervention for Hispanic/Latino Caregivers. Gerontologist. 
2023;63(3):558-67. 
474. 
Psychotherapy. 2006;43(4):531-48. 
475. 
Direct-Comparison Meta-Analysis. J Couns Psychol. 2011;58(3):279-89. 
476. 
outcomes of cultural adaptations of psychological treatments for depressive disorders: a systematic review. 
Psychol Med. 2014;44(6):1131-46. 
477. 
clinical trial globalization in Alzheimer's disease and related dementia. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2023. 
478. 
Backhouse A, Ukoumunne OC, Richards DA, McCabe R, Watkins R, Dickens C. The effectiveness of 
community-based coordinating interventions in dementia care: a meta-analysis and subgroup analysis of 
intervention components. Bmc Health Serv Res. 2017;17. 
Jutkowitz E, Pizzi LT, Shewmaker P, Alarid-Escudero F, Epstein-Lubow G, Prioli KM, et al. Cost 
479. 
effectiveness of non-drug interventions that reduce nursing home admissions for people living with dementia. 
Alzheimers & Dementia. 2023. 
480. 
diagnostic dementia care models delivered by primary care: a systematic review. Br J Gen Pract. 
2020;70(695):e434-e41. 
481. 
dementia: a meta-analysis. Ageing Soc. 2020;40(11):2355-92. 
482. 
Liu X, Wang Y, Wang S. The efficacy of psychological interventions for depressed primary caregivers of 
patients with Alzheimer's disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2022;54(3):355-66. 
483. 
interventions on depression, anxiety, quality of life, and caregiver burden for informal caregivers of people with 
dementia: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Int J Nurs Stud. 2022;129:104204. 
484. 
With Dementia in Cost-Effective Ways: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Value Health. 2021;24(12):1853-
62. 
485. 
Cheng ST, Li KK, Losada A, Zhang F, Au A, Thompson LW, Gallagher-Thompson D. The effectiveness of 
nonpharmacological interventions for informal dementia caregivers: An updated systematic review and meta-
analysis. Psychol Aging. 2020;35(1):55-77. 
Livingston G, Manela M, O'Keeffe A, Rapaport P, Cooper C, Knapp M, et al. Clinical effectiveness of the 
486. 
START (STrAtegies for RelaTives) psychological intervention for family carers and the effects on the cost of care 
for people with dementia: 6-year follow-up of a randomised controlled trial. Brit J Psychiat. 2020;216(1):35-42. 
487. 
with dementia in high, middle and low-income countries in Asia: a scoping review. Bmj Glob Health. 2019;4(6). 
488. 
(STrAtegies for RelaTives) for dementia carers in the third sector: Widening access to evidence-based 
interventions. Plos One. 2021;16(6). 
489.  Webster L, Amador S, Rapaport P, Mukadam N, Sommerlad A, James T, et al. Tailoring STrAtegies for 
RelaTives for Black and South Asian dementia family carers in the United Kingdom: A mixed methods study. Int J 
Geriatr Psych. 2023;38(1). 
490. 
Within Adult Day Services: Outcomes of a Multisite Trial. Gerontologist. 2023. 

Gitlin LN, Roth DL, Marx K, Parker LJ, Koeuth S, Dabelko-Schoeny H, et al. Embedding Caregiver Support 

Hinton L, Tran D, Nguyen TN, Ho J, Gitlin L. Interventions to support family caregivers of people living 

Amador S, Rapaport P, Lang I, Sommerlad A, Mukadam N, Stringer A, et al. Implementation of START 

Huo Z, Chan JYC, Lin J, Bat BKK, Chan TK, Tsoi KKF, Yip BHK. Supporting Informal Caregivers of People 

Sun Y, Ji M, Leng M, Li X, Zhang X, Wang Z. Comparative efficacy of 11 non-pharmacological 

87 

Yu Y, Xiao L, Ullah S, Meyer C, Wang J, Pot AM, He JJ. The effectiveness of internet-based 

Xu H, Garcia-Ptacek S, Jonsson L, Wimo A, Nordstrom P, Eriksdotter M. Long-term Effects of 

Profyri E, Leung P, Huntley J, Orgeta V. Effectiveness of treatments for people living with severe 

Cummings J, Lee G, Nahed P, Kambar M, Zhong K, Fonseca J, Taghva K. Alzheimer's disease drug 

Liu KY, Howard R. Can we learn lessons from the FDA's approval of aducanumab? Nat Rev Neurol. 

Petersen RC, Aisen PS, Andrews JS, Atri A, Matthews BR, Rentz DM, et al. Expectations and clinical 

Sperling RA, Donohue MC, Raman R, Rafii MS, Johnson K, Masters CL, et al. Trial of Solanezumab in 

Schneider LS. What the Gantenerumab Trials Teach Us about Alzheimer's Treatment. N Engl J Med. 

Zuin M, Cherubini A, Volpato S, Ferrucci L, Zuliani G. Acetyl-cholinesterase-inhibitors slow cognitive 

Gonzalez-Fraile E, Ballesteros J, Rueda JR, Santos-Zorrozua B, Sola I, McCleery J. Remotely delivered 

491. 
information, training and support for informal caregivers of people with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2021;1(1):CD006440. 
492. 
psychoeducation programs for caregivers of people living with dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Aging Ment Health. 2023:1-17. 
493. 
dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled clinical trials. Ageing Res Rev. 
2022;82:101758. 
494. 
Cholinesterase Inhibitors on Cognitive Decline and Mortality. Neurology. 2021;96(17):E2220-E30. 
495. 
decline and decrease overall mortality in older patients with dementia. Scientific Reports. 2022;12(1). 
496. 
development pipeline: 2022. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2022;8(1):e12295. 
497. 
2023;389(20):1918-20. 
498. 
Preclinical Alzheimer's Disease. New England Journal of Medicine. 2023. 
499. 
2021;17(11):715-22. 
500. 
meaningfulness of randomized controlled trials. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2023. 
501. 
Andrews JS, Desai U, Kirson NY, Zichlin ML, Ball DE, Matthews BR. Disease severity and minimal clinically 
important differences in clinical outcome assessments for Alzheimer's disease clinical trials. Alzheimers Dement 
(N Y). 2019;5:354-63. 
502. 
Alzheimer's disease trials. Lancet Psychiatry. 2021;8(11):1013-6. 
503. 
Lansdall CJ, McDougall F, Butler LM, Delmar P, Pross N, Qin S, et al. Establishing Clinically Meaningful 
Change on Outcome Assessments Frequently Used in Trials of Mild Cognitive Impairment Due to Alzheimer's 
Disease. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2023;10(1):9-18. 
504. 
for Alzheimer's disease. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2023;4(11):e645-e51. 
505. 
506. 
framework to assess disease-modifying therapies in preclinical and early Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Res 
Ther. 2022;14(1):54. 
507.  Walsh S, Merrick R, Richard E, Nurock S, Brayne C. Lecanemab for Alzheimer's disease. BMJ. 
2022;379:o3010. 
508. 
1: Meta-analysis and review of efficacy and safety data, and medico-economical aspects. Rev Neurol (Paris). 
2022;178(10):1011-30. 
509. 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Neurology. 2023. 
510. 
Use Recommendations. Jpad-J Prev Alzheim. 2023. 
511. 
aducanumab. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2021;69(10):2995-8. 

Rubin R. Who Should-and Can-Get Lecanemab, the New Alzheimer Disease Drug? Jama. 2023. 
Assuncao SS, Sperling RA, Ritchie C, Kerwin DR, Aisen PS, Lansdall C, et al. Meaningful benefits: a 

Villain N, Planche V, Levy R. High-clearance anti-amyloid immunotherapies in Alzheimer's disease. Part 

Liu KY, Walsh S, Brayne C, Merrick R, Richard E, Howard R. Evaluation of clinical benefits of treatments 

Cummings J, Apostolova L, Rabinovici GD, Atri A, Aisen P, Greenberg S, et al. Lecanemab: Appropriate 

Alves F, Kallinowski P, Ayton S. Accelerated Brain Volume Loss Caused by Anti-beta-Amyloid Drugs: A 

Liu KY, Schneider LS, Howard R. The need to show minimum clinically important differences in 

Canevelli M, Rossi PD, Astrone P, Consorti E, Vanacore N, Cesari M. "Real world" eligibility for 

88 

Jeong J, Yoo EY, Pryor L, Kang BH, Ha YN. The Effects of a Tailored Activity Program for Dementia: A 

Lin GA WM, Wright A, Agboola F, Herron-Smith S, Pearson, SD RD. Beta-Amyloid Antibodies for Early 

Perneczky R, Jessen F, Grimmer T, Levin J, Floel A, Peters O, Froelich L. Anti-amyloid antibody therapies 

Franzen S, Smith JE, van den Berg E, Rivera Mindt M, van Bruchem-Visser RL, Abner EL, et al. Diversity in 

Pittock RR, Aakre JA, Castillo AM, Ramanan VK, Kremers WK, Jack CR, Jr., et al. Eligibility for Anti-Amyloid 

512. 
Treatment in a Population-Based Study of Cognitive Aging. Neurology. 2023;101(19):e1837-e49. 
513. 
Alzheimer's disease drug trials: The importance of eligibility criteria. Alzheimers Dement. 2022;18(4):810-23. 
CMS Finalizes Medicare Coverage Policy for Monoclonal Antibodies Directed Against Amyloid for the 
514. 
Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease. cms.gov; 2022. 
515.  Mahase E. Alzheimer's disease: FDA approves lecanemab amid cost and safety concerns. BMJ. 
2023;380:73. 
516. 
Alzheimer’s Disease: Effectiveness and Value; Evidence Report.2023. 
517. 
Jonsson L, Wimo A, Handels R, Johansson G, Boada M, Engelborghs S, et al. The affordability of 
lecanemab, an amyloid-targeting therapy for Alzheimer's disease: an EADC-EC viewpoint. Lancet Reg Health-Eu. 
2023;29. 
518. 
in Alzheimer's disease. Brain. 2023. 
519.  Woods B, Rai HK, Elliott E, Aguirre E, Orrell M, Spector A. Cognitive stimulation to improve cognitive 
functioning in people with dementia. Cochrane Db Syst Rev. 2023(1). 
520. 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Phys Occup Ther Geri. 2023;41(2):280-91. 
521.  Novelli MMPC, Machado SCB, Lima GB, Cantatore L, Sena BP, Rodrigues RS, et al. Effects of the Tailored 
Activity Program in Brazil (TAP-BR) for Persons With Dementia A Randomized Pilot Trial. Alz Dis Assoc Dis. 
2018;32(4):339-45. 
de Oliveira AM, Radanovic M, Homem de Mello PC, Buchain PC, Dias Vizzotto A, Harder J, et al. An 
522. 
intervention to reduce neuropsychiatric symptoms and caregiver burden in dementia: Preliminary results from a 
randomized trial of the tailored activity program-outpatient version. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2019;34(9):1301-7. 
523. 
Pizzi LT, Prioli KM, Jutkowitz E, Piersol CV, Lyketsos CG, Abersone I, et al. Economic Analysis of the 
Tailored Activity Program: A Nonpharmacological Approach to Improve Quality of Life in People Living With 
Dementia and their Caregivers. J Appl Gerontol. 2023;42(7):1433-44. 
524. 
Sanders LMJ, Hortobagyi T, Karssemeijer EGA, Van der Zee EA, Scherder EJA, van Heuvelen MJG. Effects 
of low- and high-intensity physical exercise on physical and cognitive function in older persons with dementia: a 
randomized controlled trial. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2020;12(1):28. 
525. 
Independence, and Stability in Early Dementia and mild cognitive impairment (PrAISED): randomised controlled 
trial. BMJ. 2023;382:e074787. 
Lamb SE, Sheehan B, Atherton N, Nichols V, Collins H, Mistry D, et al. Dementia And Physical Activity 
526. 
(DAPA) trial of moderate to high intensity exercise training for people with dementia: randomised controlled 
trial. BMJ. 2018;361:k1675. 
527. 
diseases: a closer look at selected aspects of the neural circuitry. J Neurol Sci. 2011;307(1-2):9-14. 
528. 
dementia living in the community: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ageing Res Rev. 2023;83:101782. 
529.  Webster L, Costafreda Gonzalez S, Stringer A, Lineham A, Budgett J, Kyle S, et al. Measuring the 
prevalence of sleep disturbances in people with dementia living in care homes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Sleep. 2020;43(4). 
530.  McCleery J, Sharpley AL. Pharmacotherapies for sleep disturbances in dementia. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2020;11(11):CD009178. 
531. 
disturbance in people living with dementia: a population-based cohort study. Bmc Med. 2020;18(1). 

Richardson K, Loke YK, Fox C, Maidment I, Howard R, Steel N, et al. Adverse effects of Z-drugs for sleep 

Koren T, Fisher E, Webster L, Livingston G, Rapaport P. Prevalence of sleep disturbances in people with 

Harwood RH, Goldberg SE, Brand A, van Der Wardt V, Booth V, Di Lorito C, et al. Promoting Activity, 

Zhong G, Naismith SL, Rogers NL, Lewis SJ. Sleep-wake disturbances in common neurodegenerative 

89 

Costello H, Roiser JP, Howard R. Antidepressant medications in dementia: evidence and potential 

d'Angremont E, Begemann MJH, van Laar T, Sommer IEC. Cholinesterase Inhibitors for Treatment of 

Ismail Z, Creese B, Aarsland D, Kales HC, Lyketsos CG, Sweet RA, Ballard C. Psychosis in Alzheimer disease 

Ballard C, Youakim JM, Coate B, Stankovic S. Pimavanserin in Alzheimer's Disease Psychosis: Efficacy in 

Grossberg G, Lee D, Slomkowski M, Hefting N, Chen DL, Larsen G, et al. Efficacy, Safety and Tolerability 

Tariot PN, Cummings JL, Soto-Martin ME, Ballard C, Erten-Lyons D, Sultzer DL, et al. Trial of Pimavanserin 

532.  Wilfling D, Calo S, Dichter MN, Meyer G, Mohler R, Kopke S. Non-pharmacological interventions for 
sleep disturbances in people with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023;1(1):CD011881. 
533. 
mechanisms of treatment-resistance. Psychol Med. 2023;53(3):654-67. 
534.  Orgeta V, Leung P, del-Pino-Casado R, Qazi A, Orrell M, Spector AE, Methley AM. Psychological 
treatments for depression and anxiety in dementia and mild cognitive impairment. Cochrane Db Syst Rev. 
2022(4). 
535. 
- mechanisms, genetics and therapeutic opportunities. Nat Rev Neurol. 2022;18(3):131-44. 
536. 
DeMichele-Sweet MAA, Klei L, Creese B, Harwood JC, Weamer EA, McClain L, et al. Genome-wide 
association identifies the first risk loci for psychosis in Alzheimer disease. Mol Psychiatry. 2021;26(10):5797-811. 
537. 
Psychotic Symptoms in Alzheimer Disease and Parkinson Disease: A Meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol. 2023. 
538. 
in Dementia-Related Psychosis. N Engl J Med. 2021;385(4):309-19. 
539.  Mosholder AD, Ma Y, Akhtar S, Podskalny GD, Feng YH, Lyu H, et al. Mortality Among Parkinson's 
Disease Patients Treated With Pimavanserin or Atypical Antipsychotics: An Observational Study in Medicare 
Beneficiaries. Am J Psychiat. 2022;179(8):553-61. 
540. 
Patients with More Pronounced Psychotic Symptoms. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2019;6(1):27-33. 
541. 
of Brexpiprazole for the Treatment of Agitation in Alzheimer's Dementia: A 12-Week, Randomized, Double-Blind, 
Placebo-Controlled Trial. Am J Geriat Psychiat. 2023;31(3):S99-S100. 
542. 
Grossberg GT, Kohegyi E, Mergel V, Josiassen MK, Meulien D, Hobart M, et al. Efficacy and Safety of 
Brexpiprazole for the Treatment of Agitation in Alzheimer's Dementia: Two 12-Week, Randomized, Double-
Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trials. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2020;28(4):383-400. 
543.  Muhlbauer V, Mohler R, Dichter MN, Zuidema SU, Kopke S, Luijendijk HJ. Antipsychotics for agitation 
and psychosis in people with Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2021;12(12):CD013304. 
544. 
Agitation in Alzheimer Dementia: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol. 2023. 
545. 
and psychosis associated with dementia: a pooled analysis including three randomized, placebo-controlled 
double-blind trials in nursing home residents treated with risperidone. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2005;107(6):497-
508. 
546. 
dementia: meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials. Jama. 2005;294(15):1934-43. 
547. 
determine the severity of delirium: a population study. Brain. 2023. 
548. 
Han QYC, Rodrigues NG, Klainin-Yobas P, Haugan G, Wu XV. Prevalence, risk factors, and impact of 
delirium on hospitalized older adults with dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of the 
American Medical Directors Association. 2022;23(1):23-32. e27. 
549. 
Cognitive Decline: A Meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol. 2020;77(11):1373-81. 
550. 
12 months predicts dementia: results of the Delirium and Cognitive Impact in Dementia (DECIDE) study. Age 
Ageing. 2021;50(3):914-20. 

Tsui A, Yeo N, Searle SD, Bowden H, Hoffmann K, Hornby J, et al. Extremes of baseline cognitive function 

Lee D, Slomkowski M, Hefting N, Chen D, Larsen KG, Kohegyi E, et al. Brexpiprazole for the Treatment of 

Richardson SJ, Davis DHJ, Stephan BCM, Robinson L, Brayne C, Barnes LE, et al. Recurrent delirium over 

De Deyn PP, Katz IR, Brodaty H, Lyons B, Greenspan A, Burns A. Management of agitation, aggression, 

Goldberg TE, Chen C, Wang Y, Jung E, Swanson A, Ing C, et al. Association of Delirium With Long-term 

Schneider LS, Dagerman KS, Insel P. Risk of death with atypical antipsychotic drug treatment for 

90 

Birks J. Cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer's disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 

Liu KY, Howard R, Banerjee S, Comas-Herrera A, Goddard J, Knapp M, et al. Dementia wellbeing and 

Liu NY, Sun JH, Wang XY, Zhao M, Huang QQ, Li H. The Impact of Dementia on the Clinical Outcome of 

Suarez-Gonzalez A, Rajagopalan J, Livingston G, Alladi S. The effect of COVID-19 isolation measures on 

Geyskens L, Jeuris A, Deschodt M, Van Grootven B, Gielen E, Flamaing J. Patient-related risk factors for 

551. 
in-hospital functional decline in older adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Age Ageing. 
2022;51(2):afac007. 
552. 
Khachaturian AS, Hayden KM, Devlin JW, Fleisher LA, Lock SL, Cunningham C, et al. International drive to 
illuminate delirium: A developing public health blueprint for action. Alzheimers & Dementia. 2020;16(5):711-25. 
553. 
COVID-19: Review and expert consensus on current research and knowledge gaps. Int J Geriatr Psych. 
2021;36(11):1597-639. 
554. 
COVID-19: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;78(4):1775-82. 
555. 
the cognition and mental health of people living with dementia: A rapid systematic review of one year of 
quantitative evidence. Eclinicalmedicine. 2021;39. 
556. 
2006(1):CD005593. 
557. 
protect older people in long-term care facilities from COVID-19. BMJ Open. 2021;11(10):e047012. 
558. 
The future is now. Dement Geriatr Cogn. 2019;47(3):131-9. 
559. 
sensors—a systematic review. Alzheimer's & Dementia. 2018;14(6):824-32. 
560.  Moyle W, Murfield J, Lion K. The effectiveness of smart home technologies to support the health 
outcomes of community-dwelling older adults living with dementia: A scoping review. International Journal of 
Medical Informatics. 2021;153:104513. 
561. 
maintain independent living at home for people with dementia: the ATTILA RCT. Health Technology Assessment 
(Winchester, England). 2021;25(19):1. 
562. 
review and meta-analysis of feasibility, acceptability and the effect on cognition, neuropsychiatric symptoms 
and quality of life. Ageing Res Rev. 2022;78:101633. 

Frazer K, Mitchell L, Stokes D, Lacey E, Crowley E, Kelleher CC. A rapid systematic review of measures to 

Khan SS, Ye B, Taati B, Mihailidis A. Detecting agitation and aggression in people with dementia using 

Gathercole R, Bradley R, Harper E, Davies L, Pank L, Lam N, et al. Assistive technology and telecare to 

Astell AJ, Bouranis N, Hoey J, Lindauer A, Mihailidis A, Nugent C, Robillard JM. Technology and dementia: 

Yu C, Sommerlad A, Sakure L, Livingston G. Socially assistive robots for people with dementia: Systematic 

91 

 
 
 
