URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/interview-experiences/futures-first-interview-experience-for-market-analyst/
DATE: 2023-10-16 06:14:26

Futures First Interview Experience For Market Analyst - GeeksforGeeks 

 Courses 

 Tutorials 

 Interview Prep 

 DSA 
 Practice Problems 
 C 
 C++ 
 Java 
 Python 
 JavaScript 
 Data Science 
 Machine Learning 
 Courses 
 Linux 
 DevOps 

 Futures First Interview Experience For Market Analyst

 Last Updated : 16 Oct, 2023 

 Let me give you some brief about the background. I am a student with BTech in Computer Science 2024. Upon my graduation started finding a job, In this article, I am going to cover one of my interview experiences with Future First, The role that I applied for is Market Analyst in Gurgaon, Haryana. Let's discuss rounds of the interview process. 

 Round 1: Aptitude Test (Duration: 40 minutes) 
 The first round is conducting an aptitude test. This test was a combination of various sections, each with its unique challenges. the majority of questions from Data Interpretation, Logical Reasoning, and Mathematics. It's important to note that there was a negative marking in one section which takes both time and accuracy so it's better to have good practice in aptitude questions. Let's cover section-wise now which type of questions is covered in each section is 

 Data Interpretation: In this section topics were asked from graphs and charts, presenting data comprehensibly. 
 Logical Reasoning: Questions in this section were from visual reasoning and blood relationships, coding-decoding, and series. 
 Mathematics: This section includes calculation questions like HCF and LCM. 
 I would say the overall difficulty level of this round was moderate. 

 Round 2: Group Test (Fasters Finger First Kind) 
 After clearing the first round, The next round was a group test that was conducted in person. Candidates were divided into groups of 5-6 people. This round includes approximately 20 math-based questions. Every correct answer was rewarded correct answers with points and incorrect responses were. This round not only focused on aptitude tests but most importantly checking teamwork, decision-making skills, problem-solving, and quick thinking were counted to succeed in this round. 

 Round 3: Technical + HR 
 After a clear second round, The third and final rounds combined both technical and HR questions. In this round, the interviewer aimed to know about your willingness for the role and ability to contribute to the company. As a Computer Science student, I was questioned about how my skills would help in a finance-related role, and why I chose to apply for this position. The interviewer also asked about my prior experiences, mainly related to my role like how much I had any exposure to trading. I don't have any experience as such in trading, but the interviewer appreciated my honesty and I got a chance to ask questions regarding the financial domain. 

 Result: Selected 
 After the last round in just 30 minutes, I got my result. Fortunately, I received the news that I had been selected for the position of Market Analyst at Futures First. 

 Conclusion 
 My journey from being an undergraduate Computer Science student to applying and being selected for a Finance-related position with a decent package. I would say the interview process at Futures First was a challenging aptitude test, group dynamics, and a final evaluation of my technical and interpersonal skills. If you think or want to try in a different domain not related to your stream just give it a try by applying in that position. You get to know a lot more things and opportunities apart from your mainstream. 

 Comment

 Explore
 DSA Tutorial 10 min read 

 System Design Tutorial 4 min read 

 Aptitude Questions and Answers 3 min read 

 Web Development Technologies 5 min read 

 AI, ML and Data Science Tutorial 3 min read 

 DevOps Tutorial 3 min read 

 Corporate & Communications Address:

 A-143, 6th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh (201305)

 Registered Address:

 K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305

 Company
 About Us 
 Legal 
 Privacy Policy 
 Contact Us 
 Advertise with us 
 GFG Corporate Solution 
 Campus Training Program 
 Explore
 POTD 
 Job-A-Thon 
 Blogs 
 Nation Skill Up 
 Tutorials
 Programming Languages 
 DSA 
 Web Technology 
 AI, ML & Data Science 
 DevOps 
 CS Core Subjects 
 Interview Preparation 
 Software and Tools 
 Courses
 ML and Data Science 
 DSA and Placements 
 Web Development 
 Programming Languages 
 DevOps & Cloud 
 GATE 
 Trending Technologies 
 Videos
 DSA 
 Python 
 Java 
 C++ 
 Web Development 
 Data Science 
 CS Subjects 
 Preparation Corner
 Interview Corner 
 Aptitude 
 Puzzles 
 GfG 160 
 System Design 

 @GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved