URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/interview-experiences/aqr-capital-management-interview-experience-on-campus-sde-intern-august-2025/
DATE: 2025-09-15 11:01:00

AQR Capital Management Interview Experience - GeeksforGeeks 

 Courses 

 Tutorials 

 Interview Prep 

 DSA 
 Practice Problems 
 C 
 C++ 
 Java 
 Python 
 JavaScript 
 Data Science 
 Machine Learning 
 Courses 
 Linux 
 DevOps 

 AQR Capital Management Interview Experience

 Last Updated : 15 Sep, 2025 

 Opportunity: 
 AQR Capital Management visited our campus in August 2025 to hire SDE interns. 
 Eligibility Criteria: 
 Minimum 7 CPI 
 Eligible Branches: CSE, EE, ECE 
 Hiring Process: 
 The recruitment process had 4–5 rounds in total. For most candidates, there were 4 rounds; a few were asked to attend Round 5 based on recruiter decisions. 
 All interviews were conducted virtually. There were no explicit shortlisting lists after each round — only those who were selected received further interview emails from HR. 
 Rounds Overview: 
 Online Assessment 
 Technical Interview Round 1 (30 mins) 
 Technical Interview Round 2 (30 mins) 
 Technical Interview Round 3 (30 mins) 
 Final Interview (Optional, recruiter’s call) 
 Round 1: Online Assessment 
 Format: 20 MCQs + 2 Coding Questions 
 MCQs: Based on DBMS, OOPs, and OS (no aptitude questions). 
 Coding: Easy–medium level, solvable within time if you stay calm. 
 I was able to solve both coding questions and most MCQs correctly. 
 Result : Out of all participants, 19 students were shortlisted. 
 Round 2: Technical Interview 1 
 Just the next day after the online assessment we have our interviews started. 
 This was a technical interview round. I was asked questions related to core CSE Subjects like critical section, paging, virtual functions, deadlock,caching,Joins, Normalisation, etc., and some questions related to my resume also like the tech stacks used and some concepts related to those tech stacks like props, state, JWT, JSON, etc. (No DSA questions) 
 Result: Out of all participants, 16 students were shortlisted. 
 Round 3: Technical Interview 2 
 In this round I was again asked some questions realted to my project and oops questions like multiple inheritance, diamond Problem, etc and 1 scenario based problem that is I have different types of customers and I have to design different kinds of login methods for them so i have to design a class structure for it in Notepad, and then some follow ups on this question only. 
 Result: Out of all participants, 6 students were shortlisted. 
 Round 4: Technical Interview 3 
 This was the final round for most of us . In this i was given a coding question which i have to code in any code editor. 
 The Question was that we have a binary tree, and for each node i have to find the sum of the subtree that is rooted at that node. 
 Then further follow ups were there like In the company data changes very frequently, So new nodes might be added or deleted from the tree in every second then how will u optimise the solution. 
 And some questions related to projects were also asked. 
 Unfortunately, I was not able to crack this round. 
 Round 5: 
 Only One student from the 6 of us got the mail for this round and he was asked the same questions that have been asked from me in previous round. But at last he was not selected, Only one student was selected from round 4 itself. 

 Comment

 Explore
 DSA Tutorial 10 min read 

 System Design Tutorial 4 min read 

 Aptitude Questions and Answers 3 min read 

 Web Development Technologies 5 min read 

 AI, ML and Data Science Tutorial 3 min read 

 DevOps Tutorial 3 min read 

 Corporate & Communications Address:

 A-143, 6th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh (201305)

 Registered Address:

 K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305

 Company
 About Us 
 Legal 
 Privacy Policy 
 Contact Us 
 Advertise with us 
 GFG Corporate Solution 
 Campus Training Program 
 Explore
 POTD 
 Job-A-Thon 
 Blogs 
 Nation Skill Up 
 Tutorials
 Programming Languages 
 DSA 
 Web Technology 
 AI, ML & Data Science 
 DevOps 
 CS Core Subjects 
 Interview Preparation 
 Software and Tools 
 Courses
 ML and Data Science 
 DSA and Placements 
 Web Development 
 Programming Languages 
 DevOps & Cloud 
 GATE 
 Trending Technologies 
 Videos
 DSA 
 Python 
 Java 
 C++ 
 Web Development 
 Data Science 
 CS Subjects 
 Preparation Corner
 Interview Corner 
 Aptitude 
 Puzzles 
 GfG 160 
 System Design 

 @GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved