URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/interview-experiences/d-e-shaw-internship-interview-experience-off-campus/
DATE: 2021-08-26 06:43:39

D. E. Shaw Internship Interview Experience | Off Campus - GeeksforGeeks 

 Courses 

 Tutorials 

 Interview Prep 

 DSA 
 Practice Problems 
 C 
 C++ 
 Java 
 Python 
 JavaScript 
 Data Science 
 Machine Learning 
 Courses 
 Linux 
 DevOps 

 D. E. Shaw Internship Interview Experience | Off Campus

 Last Updated : 23 Jul, 2025 

 Round 1: Online Assessment 

 Platform: HackerRank

 Duration : 95 minutes

 Three coding questions with a restricted time limit for each: 25 minutes, 35 minutes, 35 minutes.

 String manipulation based problem.
 Minimum number of operations to get desired array 
 Dynamic programming based problem.

 Round 2: Codepair Interview 1 

 Duration : 60 minutes

 count number of ways to reach the nth stair 
 A lot of questions on classes, constructors, destructors, virtual functions, dynamic memory allocation, etc. (In-depth questions from these topics)
 Given a never-ending stream of cities representing the query for a certain city, design a data structure to store them in such a way that the top 10 most queried cities can be retrieved efficiently in the decreasing order of their number of queries with each subsequent entry.

 Round 3: Codepair Interview 2 

 Duration: 90 minutes

 capacity to ship within d days 
 Count the number of nodes in a complete binary tree 
 Get min element from a stack in O(1) time 
 Difference between SQL and NoSQL Databases and their examples
 Foreign key
 ACID properties
 Define transaction
 Rollback and commit
 Write a SQL query to fetch names of students getting second-highest score (Marks in 5 subjects are given for each student in a single table. Final score of a student = sum of marks obtained in all 5 subjects)
 Some questions from OOPs.
 Design a data structure to implement browser history. It should have the following features:
 Last accessed URLs should be sorted according to their timestamps (latest to earliest)
 Search the URLs accessed within a given time duration (like last 30 minutes, 1 hour, etc.)
 Search a URL with a given keyword

 Round 4: Codepair Interview 3 

 Duration : 25 minutes

 Design a data structure to implement dynamic polymorphism in C++
 Given a never-ending stream of cities, design a data structure to store them in such a way that the cities are stored efficiently in the decreasing order of their number of visits with each subsequent entry. If two cities have the same number of visits, then they should be stored in the order of their first occurrence in the stream.
 A brief discussion about virtual functions and C++ dynamic binding mechanism.

 Comment

 Explore
 DSA Tutorial 10 min read 

 System Design Tutorial 4 min read 

 Aptitude Questions and Answers 3 min read 

 Web Development Technologies 5 min read 

 AI, ML and Data Science Tutorial 3 min read 

 DevOps Tutorial 3 min read 

 Corporate & Communications Address:

 A-143, 6th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh (201305)

 Registered Address:

 K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305

 Company
 About Us 
 Legal 
 Privacy Policy 
 Contact Us 
 Advertise with us 
 GFG Corporate Solution 
 Campus Training Program 
 Explore
 POTD 
 Job-A-Thon 
 Blogs 
 Nation Skill Up 
 Tutorials
 Programming Languages 
 DSA 
 Web Technology 
 AI, ML & Data Science 
 DevOps 
 CS Core Subjects 
 Interview Preparation 
 Software and Tools 
 Courses
 ML and Data Science 
 DSA and Placements 
 Web Development 
 Programming Languages 
 DevOps & Cloud 
 GATE 
 Trending Technologies 
 Videos
 DSA 
 Python 
 Java 
 C++ 
 Web Development 
 Data Science 
 CS Subjects 
 Preparation Corner
 Interview Corner 
 Aptitude 
 Puzzles 
 GfG 160 
 System Design 

 @GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved