URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/interview-experiences/de-shaw-internship-interview-experience-on-campus-2021/
DATE: 2020-08-07 01:59:45

DE Shaw Internship Interview Experience (On-Campus) 2021 - GeeksforGeeks 

 Courses 

 Tutorials 

 Interview Prep 

 DSA 
 Practice Problems 
 C 
 C++ 
 Java 
 Python 
 JavaScript 
 Data Science 
 Machine Learning 
 Courses 
 Linux 
 DevOps 

 DE Shaw Internship Interview Experience (On-Campus) 2021

 Last Updated : 15 Jul, 2025 

 DE Shaw visited our campus (MNIT Jaipur) in the first week of August 2020 for a 2-month software development internship.

 Technical Test (90 minutes) | HackerRank: 

 Given an array of numbers find the number of triplets such that Ai<Aj<Ak or Ai>Aj>Ak for all (i<j<k). | (O(n^2) or O(n log(n)).
 There are x lions, y tigers, z leopards, and w panthers. Find the number of ways to place them on a line such that no two same animals are adjacent to each other. (0<=x,y,z,w<=51) [DP]
 LCS of three strings 

 I was able to solve three questions in 40 mins and because of this, I was given very much preference in the interview.

 Out of 101 students, 12 were shortlisted for the next round.

 Technical Interview | Codepair (HackerRank) | (60 Minutes): 

 There were two interviewers and both of them were very helpful. 

 Given two sorted array of size n and m+n. with n and m elements respectively merge them without using extra space.
 A brief discussion on the project.
 Explain Virtual function (vptr and vtable). 
 Multiple Inheritance and Diamond Problem. 
 Page replacement algorithm. 
 concept of virtual memory. 
 Dining Philosopher problem using Semaphore, mutex lock with pseudo code. 
 Thrashing 
 Convert BST to min-heap. 
 Puzzle : Magnets are placed linearly, with each magnet to be considered as of point object. each magnet suffers force from its left-sided magnets such that they repel it to the right and vice versa. All forces are repulsive. The force is inversely proportional to distance (1/d, d being the distance). Make a function as shown below that takes n as the number of magnets, and an array of their distance from the origin, which finds all the points along the linear line where net force is ZERO. Distance has to be calculated with the precision of epsilon.
 Median of Stream of Running Integers 
 Scheduling (OS)
 Few more questions on OOPS which I don't remember.

 3 students out of 12 were promoted to the next TI. Your coding round score , attitude, confidence, and communication skills matter most. You must have a deep knowledge of at least one language. Read all the articles related to your primary language on geeks for geeks.

 Technical Interview 2 (50 Minutes): 

 There were two interviewers in this round also. They were also very helpful and were providing necessary hints at the relevant times 

 Design data structure to implement a text editor. I was made to code following operations ( they often asked to write in the most readable and optimal way ) 
 Insertion at any location 
 Deletion of word from any location 
 Undo 
 Redo 
 Copy/Paste 

 (in between they asked me questions related to any STL library which I used and there internal working) 

 How cin and cout work and questions on operator overloading
 Question on malloc and free in C.
 Difference between endl and \n.
 Difference between strongly typed and weakly typed languages, dynamic and static languages, and classify c++ and python based on the same.
 What will happen if I do, i nt arr[2]; while(true)arr++ ;
 Question on Inter Process Communication.
 Page replacement algorithm.
 File handling in c++ and what happened if we open a 10gb file in a computer with 4gb RAM.

 After this round, only 2 students were selected for the summer internship and I was fortunate enough to be one of them.

 If you want then after each round you may ask some questions to the interviewee.

 Example You can ask about technologies, languages used in their company, or about the environment.

 All questions were available on GeeksForGeeks and it is the best site I found for interview preparation. A big thanks to the whole geeks for geeks team and contributors.

 Comment

 Explore
 DSA Tutorial 10 min read 

 System Design Tutorial 4 min read 

 Aptitude Questions and Answers 3 min read 

 Web Development Technologies 5 min read 

 AI, ML and Data Science Tutorial 3 min read 

 DevOps Tutorial 3 min read 

 Corporate & Communications Address:

 A-143, 6th Floor, Sovereign Corporate Tower, Sector- 136, Noida, Uttar Pradesh (201305)

 Registered Address:

 K 061, Tower K, Gulshan Vivante Apartment, Sector 137, Noida, Gautam Buddh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh, 201305

 Company
 About Us 
 Legal 
 Privacy Policy 
 Contact Us 
 Advertise with us 
 GFG Corporate Solution 
 Campus Training Program 
 Explore
 POTD 
 Job-A-Thon 
 Blogs 
 Nation Skill Up 
 Tutorials
 Programming Languages 
 DSA 
 Web Technology 
 AI, ML & Data Science 
 DevOps 
 CS Core Subjects 
 Interview Preparation 
 Software and Tools 
 Courses
 ML and Data Science 
 DSA and Placements 
 Web Development 
 Programming Languages 
 DevOps & Cloud 
 GATE 
 Trending Technologies 
 Videos
 DSA 
 Python 
 Java 
 C++ 
 Web Development 
 Data Science 
 CS Subjects 
 Preparation Corner
 Interview Corner 
 Aptitude 
 Puzzles 
 GfG 160 
 System Design 

 @GeeksforGeeks, Sanchhaya Education Private Limited , All rights reserved