URL: https://www.businessinsider.com/quant-trading-intern-what-it-was-like-hrt-sig-2023-12

Former Quant Trading Intern Shares What It Was Like at HRT and SIG - Business Insider 

 Subscribe

 Log in 

 Today's Briefing 

 Search 

 Business 

 Strategy 

 Economy 

 Finance 

 Retail 

 Advertising 

 Careers 

 Law 

 Media 

 Real Estate 

 Small Business 

 The Better Work Project 

 Personal Finance 

 Tech 

 Science 

 AI 

 Enterprise 

 Transportation 

 Startups 

 Innovation 

 Markets 

 News 

 Stocks 

 Indices 

 Commodities 

 Crypto 

 Currencies 

 ETFs 

 Lifestyle 

 Entertainment 

 Culture 

 Travel 

 Food 

 Health 

 Education 

 Parenting 

 Military & Defense 

 Politics 

 Reviews 

 Home 

 Kitchen 

 Style 

 Streaming 

 Pets 

 Tech 

 Deals 

 Gifts 

 Tickets 

 Video 

 Big Business 

 So Expensive 

 View From Above 

 Small Business 

 Authorized Account 

 Risky Business 

 Boot Camp 

 Still Standing 

 How Crime Works 

 Life Lessons 

 Level Up 

 Community 

 Games 

 Boxed 

 Pipeline 

 Knighthop 

 Tally 

 Subscribe

 My account 

 Log in 

 Newsletters

 Saved Articles

 US edition 

 Deutschland & Österreich 

 España 

 Japan 

 Polska 

 TW 全球中文版 

 Get the app 

 Finance

 I interned at HRT and SIG. Here's what it was like and what top quant trading firms look for in employees. 

 As told to 

 Aria Yang 

 Sarah Chieng interned at quant trading firms at HRT and SIG. She talks about what it was really like and why she ultimately didn't pursue trading. 
 
 Sarah Chieng 

 2023-12-12T10:22:01.439Z

 Read in app

 Copy link 

 Email 

 Facebook 

 WhatsApp 

 X 

 LinkedIn 

 Bluesky 

 Threads 

 Impact Link 

 Save 
 Saved 

 This story is available exclusively to Business Insider
 subscribers. Become an Insider 
 and start reading now. 
 Have an account? Log in . 

 This as-told-to essay is based on a conversation with Sarah Chieng, a 22-year-old former intern at Hudson River Trading, and Susquehanna International Group based in San Francisco. The following has been edited for length and clarity. 
 I was born and raised in Austin, TX and went to MIT for college. I studied mathematics and computer science, and at the very beginning of my freshman year, student clubs were recruiting. Some clubs felt super exclusive and elite — they probably only took 10 people per grade.
 After seeing many of my friends go into quant trading , I also applied and got into a club called "Traders at MIT." I heard enticing stories about working at quant trading firms: the job pays well, and the companies pamper their interns. Firms will fly interns out, put them up in hotels, treat them to nice meals, and take them to mini golf and Broadway shows.

 By my junior year, I landed two summer internships at big-name quant trading firms, Susquehanna International Group (SIG) and Hudson River Trading (HRT), and a five-day micro bootcamp internship at PEAK6.
 SIG is based in the Philadelphia Area, and the company really went the extra mile to make students happy
 During SIG's "Discovery Day," an event for students to learn about what a day in the life looks like across SIG teams, the company catered sushi and gave students Yeti tumblers and other swag.

 Then, I had the same experience when I became an intern — during the internship, we stayed in a hotel and had room service every week. In the first week, we had nice meals at a gorgeous venue by the water and, throughout the summer, full-time employees took us out for sushi and steak dinners. All these extravagant events were alluring for students, especially because we were young.
 My day-to-day was split between learning option theory from my teacher and asking questions at different trading desks. I shadowed traders and asked them questions left and right to understand their trade logic.

 Explore BI Games

 Take a smarter break in your day - and see how far you get.

 Play now 

 I found the experience at HRT a bit different and more interesting than SIG
 HRT is headquartered in New York City and focuses on high-frequency, automated trading, meaning traders don't need to be at their desks watching screens all day — they're more likely to research data science on financial data to look for patterns or trends.
 As an intern, I was assigned several projects throughout the summer. One of them was using Jupyter Notebook to sift through financial information and find what we call "alpha," or the observation or trends that we could potentially trade on.

 Like SIG, HRT also treated us to really nice meals. We regularly went to the most expensive restaurants in New York City once or twice a week — it seemed like there was no spending limit for these meals.
 I learned a lot about the industry after my internships, and here are the three things I think most people get wrong about quant trading firms.

 1. Quant trading firms don't recruit from only top schools 
 There's a common belief that quant trading firms only recruit students from Ivy League schools. In every internship I've done, I've met many people who didn't come from Ivy Leagues — some went to University of Michigan, Rutgers University, and UC Berkeley.
 I remember in one of my interviews, the HR person made it clear right off the bat that they don't even look at what school you're from when they review resumes; they review resumes "school blind."

 I know some people might not believe it, but I think it's true. My internship class was very diverse, and those who eventually got return offers weren't just the students from top colleges.
 2. You don't need to come in with trader-specific knowledge and skills 
 Trading firms don't expect you to walk into an interview with a bunch of trader-specific skills and knowledge. What these firms are really after is how quick you are on your feet, and how you think — they just want to see how quick you are. That's their real gauge of whether you'll do well.

 Take my HRT interview, for example. After I got through the hour-long online quiz with about 15 questions, I got into the next round. They threw me questions about stats, probabilities, normal variables, and even a card-playing game. I remember they gave me four cards, and told me that I had to trade on what I thought the sum of these four cards was. And then every round they flipped one card over. It was a fun experience.
 In total, it took about a month and a half to finish all the interviews and land the internship.

 3. The internship itself is one extended job interview 
 One thing I noticed at trading firms is that they don't care if you do well in your projects — we weren't expected to make huge decisions or contribute meaningfully. For example, when I worked at HRT, one of the projects I was on was to trade crypto, but the 'trading' that interns did wasn't live trading at all — there was no real money involved. It was more like practice, or mock trading.
 The internship itself felt more like a long interview — the company constantly observed how I performed and evaluated whether or not they wanted me for a full-time position.

 There was a decent amount of turnover in the first year or so. Most trading firms will have a trading training period — sometimes it's two or three months, and sometimes it's up to a year. Some firms do cuts afterward based on how you perform during the training.
 In a nutshell, what these firms care about are your research and analytical skills. Are you able to come up with good ideas? Think creatively? Analyze financial data and find something that they can trade off? That's what they are looking for.

 After doing three quant trading internships, I decided to leave because it wasn't for me — and I have no regrets 
 After my three internships, I realized trading just wasn't something I cared enough about. Initially, I pursued it for two reasons: it offered financial stability and allowed me to stay in New York, where many of my friends were. Also, because I devoted so much time already to trading internships, it seemed like the easiest path for me.
 Looking back, I feel like I got into quant due to herd mentality. The fact that many of my friends went into it and these firms pay their employees very well made it appealing. I definitely experienced the work perks that I had heard about — nice dinners, broadway shows, soccer games, cruises, and ice skating games — but the job itself wasn't something I cared enough about, and because of that, I'd always be mediocre at it.

 During the end of my sophomore year of college, I had the opportunity to take a gap semester to work in a startup with another MIT student. I feel like I'm a creative and strategic person, so I was able to shine in a startup environment. I also liked how much freedom I had.
 It took me about a year before I decided to jump into a startup, and I'm happy that my parents were super supportive about it. I realized that I'm okay without having an extravagant lifestyle — as long as I'm working on something that I'm excited about with people I like, that's all I need.

 Today, I work at a startup called Metaphor , a platform that uses machine learning to generate high-quality search results. I'm very happy that I made the pivot — I've learned the importance of pursuing what I love.
 If you worked at a quant trading firm and want to share your story, email Aria Yang at ayang@businessinsider.com . 

 Recommended video

 Trending conversations

 Business Insider tells the innovative stories you want to know 

 comments 

 comment_author 
 Loading comment 

 0 replies 

 Business Insider tells the innovative stories you want to know 

 comments 

 comment_author 
 Loading comment 

 0 replies 

 Business Insider tells the innovative stories you want to know 

 comments 

 comment_author 
 Loading comment 

 0 replies 

 Business Insider tells the innovative stories you want to know 

 comments 

 comment_author 
 Loading comment 

 0 replies 

 No comments right now, check back later.

 Comments are unavailable right now.

 Read next

 Business Insider tells the innovative stories you want to know 

 Business Insider tells the innovative stories you want to know 

 Business Insider tells the innovative stories you want to know 

 Business Insider tells the innovative stories you want to know 

 Aria Yang 

 Aria Yang was a former Business Contributors Fellow at Business Insider. Her current focus is on tech, salary transparency, and workspace verticals. Aria is a graduate of the University of California, Berkeley, Graduate School of Journalism, with a focus on multimedia and data visualization. You can connect with her on X and Instagram . 

 as told to 

 HOME 

 Subscribe

 This story is available exclusively to Business Insider
 subscribers. Become an Insider 
 and start reading now. 
 Have an account? Log in . 

 Legal & Privacy

 Terms of Service 

 Terms of Sale 

 Privacy Policy 

 Accessibility 

 Code of Ethics Policy 

 Reprints & Permissions 

 Disclaimer 

 Advertising Policies 

 Conflict of Interest Policy 

 Commerce Policy 

 Coupons Privacy Policy 

 Coupons Terms 

 Your Privacy Choices 

 Company

 About Us 

 Careers 

 Advertise With Us 

 Contact Us 

 News Tips 

 Company News 

 Awards 

 Masthead 

 Other

 Games 

 Sitemap 

 Stock quotes by finanzen.net 

 Corrections 

 Community Guidelines 

 AI Use 

 BI Live 

 Business Insider App 

 International Editions

 AT 

 DE 

 ES 

 JP 

 PL 

 TW 

 Copyright © 2026 
 Insider Inc. All rights reserved.
 Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our 
 Terms of Service 
 and 
 Privacy Policy . 

 Jump to

 Main content 

 Search 

 Account 

 Jump to top of page 

 Follow 
 Following 

 Every time publishes a story, you’ll get an alert straight to your inbox!

 Look out for an alert in your inbox the next time publishes a story!

 Every time a new story is published, you’ll get an alert straight to your inbox!

 Look out for an alert in your inbox the next time a new story is published!

 Enter your email

 Sign up 

 By clicking “Sign up”, you agree to receive emails from Business Insider. In addition, you accept Insider’s
 Terms of Service and
 Privacy Policy .

 More stories by 
 More stories from