Job role: SDE Experience: Worst
 Rounds: 
 Online Assessment: The assessment lasted 1 hour. It was held on the HackerRank platform. It consisted of 3 coding questions, medium difficulty. You could give this round remotely. I was able to solve all the questions and clear all test cases. From my college, only 4 students were selected to further rounds.
 Technical interview: The question was mostly of easy-medium difficulty and did not require a lot of calculations. I received A simple coding-based question where I was provided with some stocks and the quantity in which they were bought/sold. My goal was to print the OpenPosition, NetProfit, and Value. I did not clear this round.
 Experience : 
 The interviewer was least interested in interviewing.
 My interview was scheduled which I joined but he didn't arrive. I reached out to the company saying that I am waiting, to which they replied he will be there. After 5mins I received another message that the interviewer is busy so the interview won't be happening today. Then they rescheduled it for the next day. On the next day also the interviewer was 10mins late to the meeting. After starting the interview, he didn't ask questions about my resume (work experience or projects which is the soul of a fresher). He said, "I don't want to hear all this let's start with the interview." He then gave me a simple coding-based question mentioned above. I started by asking some questions to him related to the sum. Alongside coding, I was explaining my thought process to which he said, "you don't need to explain the code just show me the result." and then muted his mic. He was on mute for half the interview time. The other half of the time I could hear him typing, pointing out that he was doing some other work. After I displayed my result he asked me to shorten the code, which I did. He then told me to make it modular which I was able to do. Then he said I wanted to see the naming convention of how you name variables and functions I had the driver function named "main" to which he said that if I had 10k lines of code I wouldn't name my function "main". (all programmers might agree that a driver function is conventionally named "main", but this guy was something different). I asked how can make the code shorter too which he said, "I can't tell.". Then he was like time's up thanks for the interview, goodbye. No follow-ups on the result/code or any other questions? really?
 This was the worst experience I ever had. I will never suggest trying for AlphaGrep Securities when this is how they treat their candidates.